PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES 110609 Records Pakistan Science Abstract 4683 Records Scientists Directory 10305 Records R&D PROJECT 708 Records Periodicals Directory 494 Records Climate Change Articles 3071 Records R&D equipment 83 Records S&T Societies/Associations 672 Records R&D/S&T ORGANIZATIONS 168 Records S & T Libraries 2853834 Records PakCat Latest News 2025-23-04 PASTIC advances innovation and research excellence at the 10th Invention to Innovation Summit 2025. Read more 2025-18-04 Visit of Chinese Delegation from Beijing Institute of Graphics and Communication to PASTIC National Center Read more 2025-04-02 National Scientists Directory (NSD) portal is now live! Read more 2025-01-04 PASTIC organized an intensive three-day training workshop on SPSS Read more 2025-02-02 PASTIC successfully organized an intensive three-day training workshop on SPSS Read more 2024-12-16 PASTIC organized three days training workshop SPSS Read more 2025-04-17 PASTIC successfully concludes 56th SPSS training workshop Read more 2023-12-09 One day training activity on Open Journal Management System for Punjab region at Government College University Faisalabad (GCUF) Read more All News Picture Gallery Seminar on Digital Libraries: Trends, Challenges.. 10th Invention to Innovation Summit 2025 PASTIC-UAF STEM & IT INNOVATION EXPO at Faisalabad" Christmas celebration at PASTIC National Centre, Islamabad Training workshop on data journalism 17th November 20121 PASTIC HEC MoU 19-05-2021 - Invitation to collaborate Recruitment test conducted by PASTIC National Centre, Islamabad SAARC WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS PORTAL 2-Days consultative meeting Inaugration ceremony of Short term & Attachment training Chairman PSF Prof. Dr. Shahid Mahmood Baig Visited PASTIC Launching Ceremony "CPEC Science Communication Network" Publications COLLABORATIONS National International Notification on 3-Days Training on SPSS **************** 3 Days SPSS Training at PASTIC National Center QAU campus, Islamabad has been postponed due to possible campus access issues in next 3 days in Islamabad. The new dates will be announced as soon as possible. Please contact Mr. Junaid Khan (0323-8404209, 051-9248111) for any queries in this regard. Registration Fee: RS 3000 Register Now Sub-Centres Lahore Karachi Peshawar Quetta Faisalabad Muzaffarabad Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Two Day Invention to Innovation Summit, March 2015 Promote your Technology ---Win Innovation Award --- Network with Technology Developer and Investor ---Buy Viable Technology --- Participate in a great event of 500+ innovations Your Name: Email Address: Organization Name: Contact No: You Want To Display: Innovative Technology by Academia Innovative Product by Industry Innovative Idea by Students Level of your Innovative Technology: Pre Lab Idea In Lab Working Successfully Passed through Lab Trails Successfully Passed through Pilot Trails Successfully Passed through Commercial Trails Title of Your Project: Brief Overview of your Project Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | National Scientist Directory National Scientists Directory About Contact Welcome to the National Scientists Directory This platform is dedicated to connecting scientists, researchers, and innovators from across the nation. Whether you're looking to explore groundbreaking work or collaborate on future initiatives, you're in the right place. Login Create an Account Benefits of Registration Connect with Fellow Scientists and Researchers: Gain access to a network of like-minded individuals and collaborate with experts in your field. Showcase Your Expertise: Highlight your qualifications, research projects, and accomplishments to attract collaborators and opportunities. Stay Updated on Research and Innovations: Access the latest updates on groundbreaking work and industry trends. Enhance Your Visibility: Increase your recognition among academia, industry leaders, and funding agencies. Access Exclusive Opportunities: Participate in events, funding programs, workshops, and conferences tailored to your interests. Promote Collaboration and Innovation: Work on multidisciplinary projects and contribute to groundbreaking discoveries. Support National Development: Join a mission to promote scientific excellence and innovation for a prosperous future. Secure and Easy to Use: Enjoy a user-friendly platform designed to keep your data safe. 2024 National Scientist Directory. All Rights Reserved.
National Scientists Directory : Forgot Password National Scientists Directory About Contact Forgot Password Enter the text shown in the image: Not yet a member? Sign Up If you remember your account, Sign In . For any queries, please contact at webmaster@pastic.gov.pk 2024 National Scientist Directory. All Rights Reserved.
National Scientist Directory::Scientist Login National Scientists Directory About Contact CNIC Password Not yet a member? Sign Up Forgot Password? For any queries, please contact at webmaster@pastic.gov.pk 2024 National Scientist Directory. All Rights Reserved.
PASTIC | National Scientist Directory-Scientist Signup National Scientists Directory About Contact Scientist Registration CNIC Password Full Name Email Address Confirm Email Address Mobile Number Enter the text shown in the image: Already a member? Sign In Forgot Password? For any queries, please contact at webmaster@pastic.gov.pk 2024 National Scientist Directory. All Rights Reserved.
PASTIC | Abstracting & Indexing Service - Enhancing Research Visibility Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Abstracting and Indexing Service PASTIC's Abstracting & Indexing Service (AIS) is a national-level initiative aimed at improving the visibility, accessibility, and impact of Pakistani research publications. Through AIS, PASTIC provides structured abstracts and indexing services for journals, abstract books, and conference proceedings in Science & Technology (S&T) fields. About History How to Apply List of Indexed Journals Editorial Board Search Feedback Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Achievements - Advancing Scientific & Technological Information Services Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES PASTIC Achievements Publishing "Pakistan Journal of Computer & Information Systems" (hard/online). Developed "National Science Search Engine" for indigenous S&T resources. Developed 11 new databases under University Industry Collaborations & publishing a bi-monthly Technology Round Up. Published Annual Training Calendar for capacity/skill building of young researchers & librarians. Facilitated 75000 Young Researchers in completion of their M. Phil/Ph.D degrees / projects/research papers by providing more than 6.4 million abstracts and 595,000 full text articles. Modernized Bibliographic/Document Supply Service using Electronic means through provision of online request and delivery of documents. Developed a database of Pakistan Science Abstracts (60,000 abstracts of indigenous S&T journal) and continuously been strengthened by adding 100 S&T journals data annually. Developed 24 new National S&T databases Promoting University Industry Collaborations for Research based industrial development by organizing Technology Exhibitions/Seminars. Developed a Union Catalogue (3 million records) comprising database of Scientific Periodical available in 245 S&T Libraries of Pakistan. Developed a Directory of Scientific Periodicals comprising database of 484 periodicals (journals) serves as a handy reference guide for researchers. Capacity Building of around 6500 researchers in IPRs, Cyber Security, Endnote, Data mining, SPSS, Mendeley, Science & Media through organizing workshops/seminars/trainings. Facilitated automation of more than 100 libraries through capacity building of their Librarians. Produced and aired (through PTV) 9 S&T documentaries regarding latest scientific achievements and challenges for awareness of community. Providing printing services to S&T/R&D organizations & universities. Completed 6 development projects for strengthening of PASTIC services/activities. Awarded two new Projects: Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for Effective Resource Sharing among S&T Libraries in Pakistan funded by PSDP Pakistan (Budget Rs. 57.00 Million PKR) Networking and Capacity Building of Women Entrepreneurs from SAARC Countries funded by SAARC Development Fund, Bhutan. (Budget US$ .76 Million). Declared the coordinating body for UNESCO Information for All Program (IFAP). Designated as National Focal Point (NFP) of SAARC Documentation Centre (SDC) in Pakistan. Set up Technology and Innovation Support Services, TISC-Desks (in collaboration with IPO Pakistan) at PASTIC National centre Islamabad as well as at all the six sub-centres including Karachi, Quetta, Lahore, Faisalabad, Peshawar and Muzaffarabad. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Climate Change Articles Research on Global Warming & Environmental Impact Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Climate Change Articles Climate Change Articles Effects of dense planting with less basal N fertilization on rice yield, N use efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions. Author: Zhu, X., Wang, X., Li, Z., Deng, A., Zhang, Z., Zhang, J. and Zhang, W. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.17(6),2016--Pages1091--1100 Abstract: Rice cropping innovations for high yield with high N use efficiency (NUE) and low greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are significant in ensuring food security and coping with climate change. The objective of this study was to investigate the comprehensive effects of dense planting with less basal N application (DR) on rice yield, NUE and GHG emissions. Field experiments were conducted at three sites in China: Shenyang, Danyang and Jinxian representing annual single rice cropping system, wheat-rice cropping system and double rice cropping system, respectively. Four planting densities with 25, 50, 75 and 100 \% higher each time correspondingly with about 25, 50, 75 and 100 \% less in basal N rate (i.e., DR1, DR2, DR3 and DR4 correspondingly) relative to traditional cropping for high yield (CK). Across three tested sites, the DR1 mode showed a large potential of NUE enhancement by 19.6 \% and GHG emissions mitigation by 12.2 \% at area- and yield-scaled with similar rice yield compared to the CK. However, further increase in planting density and decrease in basal N application caused a significant reduction in rice yield with a large increase in GHG emissions. Our results will provide important reference to rice cropping innovations for the integrated goals of food security, environmental health and climate change mitigation in China. Keywords: Climate change, Food security, Nitrogen fertilization, Planting density, Resource use efficiency, Rice production Citedy By: 0 Profiling disasters in Kenya and their causes. Author: Huho, J. M., Mashara, J. N. and Musyimi, P. K. Journal: Academic Research International,Vol.7(1),2016--Pages290--305 Abstract: Disasters occur naturally or are caused by human activities. Most of the disasters experienced occur naturally with hydro-meteorological disasters leading. Human activities aggravate their occurrence and intensity. Global trends indicate that both natural and man-made disasters are on the increase and the more people are being affected. The most vulnerable are the poor who are exposed to various disaster risks. Most of these people are found in the developing countries where the level of disaster preparedness, resources and knowhow is still low. Kenya, like other developing countries of the world, has her populace vulnerable to disaster risks resulting in deaths and loss of property worth millions. About 70 \% of the disasters are hydrometeorological in nature particularly droughts and floods. Other common disasters include road accidents, fire tragedies, collapsing buildings and disease outbreaks. Poverty has been referred to many as the spring board of many disasters in Kenya. Poverty has led to emergence of vices such as corruption, ignorance of law, political manipulation, inadequate resources and destruction of environment which leads to climate change. Culture and beliefs have also been associated with vulnerability to disaster risks. Therefore, to reduce the risks wealth creation will be vital for the country. Keywords: Disaster risks, Man-made disasters, Natural disasters, Poverty Citedy By: 0 Characterization of cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) germplasm for drought tolerance using seedling traits and molecular markers. Author: Hassan, H. M., Azhar, F. M., Khan, A. A., Basra, S. M. A. and Hussain, M. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.17(6),2016--Pages1213--1218 Abstract: Drought tolerance is the major area of thrust nowadays, due to the water scarcity and climate change scenario, around the globe. Looking for the novel cotton germplasm tolerant to drought is an important breeding objective of the major breeding programs. On the basis of these grounds, 42 cotton varieties were evaluated for their genetic potential to perform under limited water conditions (60 \% field capacity). The germplasm was subjected to the seedling stage drought stress, to observe genetic variation within germplasm for various traits related with drought stress viz. shoot length (cm), root length (cm), excise leaf water loss (ELWL) and relative water contents (RWC). These traits were used as stress indicators and significant variation was observed for these estimates. Among the seven tolerant accessions, DPL-26 and 149F were identified as the highly tolerant due to their least SSI estimates for most of the characters studied. Likewise among the susceptible lines, FH-1000 and NF-801 were identified as highly susceptible. Our studies showed the presence of genetic variability for the trait of interest and it exhibits its potential for exploitation in the future breeding for drought tolerance. Keywords: Drought, SSR similarity matrix, Seedling characters, Stress susceptibility index, Variability Citedy By: 0 Community forestry and livelihood in Nepal: a review. Author: Bijaya, G. C. D., Cheng, S., Xu, Z., Bhandari, J., Wang, L. and Liu, X. Journal: Journal of Animal and Plant sciences,Vol.26(1),2016--Pages1--12 Abstract: This review paper is designed to demonstrate how community forestry has played an important role in the livelihood improvement of poor people in the rural areas of Nepal. The Community Forestry Program in Nepal has been a successful model for participatory action oriented especially in environmental governance and community-based forest management in developing countries which encompasses well-defined policies, institutions and practices. The program addresses the twin goals of forest conservation on one hand and livelihood improvement on the other hand. It is well known that there is a great diversity among resource users in terms of access, use and control over community forestry but still it is playing a large role in improving livelihood, increasing forest resources and also mitigating climate change. Promoting community forest management in Nepal can be an effective policy instrument for poverty eradication and improvement of overall living standards like in many developing countries. There is always a problem of capture of the benefits by the elites in each community, so increase in the level of awareness is always necessary to ensure the involvement of disenfranchised people where their needs are met, so giving access and management rights over forest resources to local communities is expected to enhance livelihoods and other benefits of these impoverished people. Policy-makers, experts and the local communities should be involved in developing and improving the benefits obtained from community forestry for the benefits of local people. Some challenges still remain, including elite capture, social disparity, inequitable benefit-sharing and exclusion of poor and marginalized users faced by the community forestry, local users, government officials and other stakeholders which should be solved soon to show the profound impact of community forestry management, utilization and conservation on a sustainable basis. Keywords: Challenges, Community forestry, Local users, Participatory Citedy By: 0 Role of agricultural extension services in adaptation to climate change in highlands of Kaghan valley, Pakistan. Author: Safdar, U., Shahbaz, B., Ali, T., Khan, I. A., Luqman, M. and Ali, S. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences,Vol.51(4),2015--Pages1095--1100 Abstract: The mountainous areas are generally considered among the least developed and fragile regions. Climate change has exacerbated the effect on livelihood of the mountainous areas, particularly small farmers who are striving hard to adopt the farming practices in accordance with the climate change. Agricultural advisory service in the mountainous areas has always been challenge for the extension workers especially in context of climate change. This paper examined the role of agricultural extension in adaptation to climate change in Kaghan valley of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan. Both qualitative and quantitative methods were used for the purpose of data collection. The paper argues that agri. extension department can play a crucial role by creating awareness regarding adaption of best practices regarding climate change, deforestation and planting of trees. There is also need of launching campaign to educate the farmers and to build their resilience to cope with the negative effects of climate change. Keywords: agricultural extension services, climate change, highlands, Kaghan, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Impact of climate change on agriculture in north west Pakistan and adaptation strategies of farming community: A case study of Kaghan valley. Author: Safdar, U., Shahbaz, B., Ali, T. and Ali, S. Journal: Journal of Agricultural Research,Vol.52(4),2015--Pages597--606 Abstract: Agricultural production is susceptible to weather and climate. Pakistan is also facing the severe impact of climate change which results into floods and low agricultural production. Hilly and mountainous regions of Northern Khyber Pakhtun Khwa (KPK) province are more vulnerable to climate change. However, little information is available on the impact of climate change on agriculture in the mountainous regions of KPK. This paper illustrates the impact of climate change on agriculture in the Kaghan Valley. A study was conducted in the Institute of Agricultural Extension and Rural Development, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad during the year 2012. Kaghan Valley of district Mansehra of KPK, Pakistan was selected as study area. The respondents were selected through multistage random sampling. The results showed that majority (65.8 \% ) of respondents belonged to middle age (35-50 years). The education level of respondents was low as more than half (55.83 \% ) of them were found illiterate. The results showed that the most significant impact of climate change was high temperature (M=3.85), high rate of precipitation (M=3.75), pattern of rainfall and temperature (M=3.75), deforestation (M=3.61) and floods (M=3.51). A large majority (67.5 \% ) of respondents started cultivating multiple crops as adaptation strategy against climate change. It is recommended that heat and moisture tolerant varieties should be introduced to conserve agriculture against the drastic impact of climate change. There is need of creating awareness among the people for their capacity building to cope with climate changes. Alternate source of fuel must be provided to the people to conserve forest and ultimately to reduce impacts of climate change. Keywords: Climate Change, Agriculture, Rural Development, Kagahn, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Evaluation of different integrated pest management modules to control Helicoverpa for adaptation to climate change. Author: Noor-Ul-Ane, M., Arif, M. J., Gogi, M. D. and Khan, M. A. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.17(3),2015--Pages483--490 Abstract: The study was designed to investigate the impact of water stress on varietal response to cotton cultivars, Helicoverpa armigera and its associated entomophagous insects [Chrysoperla carnea (Stephens) and Habrobracon hebetor (Say)] as well as the feasibility of different Integrated Pest Management (IPM) modules for management of H. armigera. For this purpose, five drought resistant cotton genotypes i.e., FH-941, FH-187, FH-4243, FH-1000 and FH-207 were sown under irrigated and drought conditions. Larval population of H. armigera was low on water stressed plants (0.32 larvae/plant) as compared to irrigated plants (0.45 larvae/plant). In contrast, H. armigea caused more damage to stressed plants (16.90 \% ) than irrigated plants (14.58 \% ). FH-4243 was evaluated as resistant genotypes on the basis of less percent damage by H. armigera for both irrigated and drought conditions with value of 13.24 and 09.59 \% , respectively. Population of C. carnea was statistically similar under both for irrigated (0.20 larvae/plant) and drought conditions (0.19 larvae/plant). Unlikely, low parasitism of H. armigera by H. hebetor was observed under drought (14.64 \% ) than irrigated condition (20.79 \% ). Treatment involving integration of Neemosal, C. carnea and H. hebetor demonstrated 0.09 larvae/plant and provided maximum control of H. armigera; whereas alone application of Neemosal proved least effective against H. armigera (0.32 larvae/plant). On the basis of cost benefit ratio (CBR), module-15 involving integrated implementation of Spinosad, Neemosal, C. carnea and H. hebetor explained highest yield (1639.52 kg/ha) and CBR (1: 6.15) and proved economical and effective IPM module. In conclusion, water stress condition had positive impact on H. armigera feeding-damage (bi-trophic interaction) but had negative impact on parasitism. Integration of bio-control agents, botanicals and reduced-risk insecticides would be more cost-effective than their alone or two-level integration. Keywords: integrated pest management, Helicoverpa, climate change., agriculture Citedy By: 0 Physical and morphological markers for adaptation of drought-tolerant wheat to arid environments. Author: Noorka, I. R. and Silva, J. A. T. D. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences,Vol.51(4),2015--Pages943--952 Abstract: The threat of climate change has instilled a demand for multi-faceted genetic diversity coupled with resourceful tools and technologies to attain biotic and abiotic resistance in crops. The present study was designed to investigate and compare common physiological and morphological traits under normal and water-stressed conditions. Seven selected (Pakistani, Indian and CIMMYT) water stress-tolerant (WST) genotypes were crossed with seven local water stress-susceptible (WSS) lines using a line tester mating approach. The hybrids, together with parents, were sown in two different environments. Combining ability effects determined the behavior of both parents as well as offspring and allowed the best combiners for different traits to be selected. Different traits showed additive and non-additive types of gene action under both environmental conditions. The present study concluded that genotypes Nesser, Dharwar Dry, Inqilab-91, among others, served as good combiners while Bakhar-2002 9247, Dharwar Dry 9021, Bakhar-2002 9244, and Nesser 9244 are promising cross combinations. Regarding grain yield, genotype 9252 and Dharwar Dry performed best under normal irrigation and water-stressed conditions, respectively. A change in water provision resulted in a shift in gene action, broad sense heritability and proportional share that each trait contributed. When these traits were pooled, it was possible to discriminate between WST and WSS genotypes and, through line tester experiments, develop drought- and water stress tolerant lines based on morphological markers under changing climatic conditions. Keywords: climate change, Physical markers, morphological markers, drought-tolerant wheat, arid environments. Citedy By: 0 Impact of climate change on livestock composition in Pothwar region, Pakistan. Author: Naheed, S., Raza, I., Hassan, T., Anwar, M. Z. and Fatima, A. Journal: : Science, Technology and Development,Vol.34(4),2015--Pages270--273 Abstract: A research study was planned to assess the impact of climate change on livestock composition during 2014, in Pothwar region of Pakistan. Data regarding this experiment were collected through questionnaire by queering 61 respondents. Paired t-test was used to check the difference between livestock composition in present and before 10 years. The results showed that paired sample t-test of livestock in which difference values for mean, standard deviation and standard error of mean for cattle are -0.525, 1.840 and 0.236, respectively, having T-value, equal to 2.23 and p-value, equal to 0.03, which is significant at 1 \% . Similarly, buffalo group indicated difference in values of mean, standard deviation and standard error of mean -0.607, 2.193 and 0.281, respectively. The paired T-statistic also shows significant difference with t-value, p-value less than 0.05, which show significance level. Likewise goat group pointed out difference values of mean, standard deviation and standard error of mean are -0.836, 2.544 and 0.326 respectively that comprises p-value equal to 0.01, which is significant at 1 \% . Keywords: Climate change, Composition, Livestock, Paired t-test, Pothwar, Standard deviation Citedy By: 0 Identification of local climate change adaptation strategies for water management in districts Attock and Chakwal, Pakistan. Author: : Habib, N., Anwer, M. Z., Naheed, S. and Hassan, T. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.34(4),2015--Pages255--259 Abstract: Climate change is predicted to have the main impact on agriculture, economy and livelihood of the populations of under-developed world and mainly in rainfed area of Pakistan, which generally called as Pothwar region. To improve the knowledge in this respect and guide policy making for adequate and relevant adaptation strategies, 60 farmers were interviewed in two districts, namely Attock and Chakwal. Farmers were asked closed and open-ended questions about farm activities, farmer climate knowledge and perceived climate change and adaptation strategies for water management. About 68 \% of the respondents perceived that Climate Change (CC) resulted in increase in temperature and 55 \% agreed on low rainfall in the study area. About 81.66 \% respondents were agreed on water stress in the study area. About 55 \% perceived that climate change reduced yield of crops and almost 75 \% respondents were rely on only rain water for crops. Copping strategies for these issues were that respondents favored the planting of drought resistant/tolerant crop varieties, planting of many different types of crops (mixed-cropping) and planting of pest/disease resistant/tolerant crop varieties. The farmers agreed that straw mulching of crops to reduce water loss (33.02 \% ) and increase in use of organic manure (57.13 \% ) are coping strategies to reduce or alleviate the effect of climate change. Keywords: Attock, Chakwal, Climate change, Pakistan, Water management Citedy By: 0 Climate change and its impacts on growth of C (Pinus wallichiana) in Murree forest division, Pakistan. Author: Bajwa, G. A., Shahzad, M. K. and Satti, H. K. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.34(1),2015--Pages27--34 Abstract: Climate change and its impacts were assessed on growth of Blue pine, Pinus wallichiana in Murree Forest Division. Change in temperature (maximum, minimum, mean) and precipitation was assessed for time period of 1963-2012 at 5050 km2 (0.50.5). Growth of P. wallichiana was measured in terms of ring-width, intra-ring early and late wood formation. The regime of maximum temperature, minimum temperature and mean temperature were estimated and found 26.450.08C, 13.400.08C and 19.900.07C, respectively, while the precipitation regime was 1148.7932.87 mm/annum. An increase of 0.60, 1.27 and 0.98C was observed in maximum temperature, minimum temperature and mean temperature, respectively. Precipitation increased to 28.88 \% during time period of 50 years. The mean ring-width, intra-ring early and late wood formation was 1.05 mm, 66.2 and 33.8 \% , respectively. The ring-width and intra-ring late wood formation increased by 5.09 and 2.57 \% , respectively, while the intra-ring early wood formation decreased by 1.28 \% . The impact of minimum temperature was significant (0.05) on the ring-width. There was a positive but non-significant correlation between temperature (maximum, minimum, mean) and positive and highly significant (pP. wallichiana. Keywords: Climate change, Murree, Pakistan, blue Pine, Citedy By: 0 Snow cover area change assessment in 2003 and 2013 using MODIS data of the upper indus basin, Pakistan. Author: Atif, I., Mahboob, M. A. and Iqbal, J. Journal: Journal of Himalayan Earth Sciences,Vol.48(2),2015--Pages117--128 Abstract: Snow cover area (SCA) is an important component of the solid water reservoir in the catchment. The study of snow trends is essential for managing water resources and for understanding regional climate change. Changes in the snow budget have socioeconomic and environmental implications for agriculture, water-based industries, environment, land management, water supplies; and many other areas related with snow melt water resources. To date, however, only a few scientific studies are available to analyze the Upper Indus Basin (UIB). The basic objective of this study was to map the change assessment of SCAof UIB in 2003 and 2013. Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite data were retrieved for the period of 2003 and 2013. Three different digital image processing techniques, including normalized difference snow index (NDSI), satellite image classification and band threshold values were applied to assess the SCA. The results show that snow accumulation typically starts from the beginning of October and continues up to mid of March. From end March, the snow starts melting until it is reduced to a minimum in September. A comparison of snow cover of 2003 and 2013 clearly indicates that the snow accumulation period has shifted and anomaly was observed in the start of November. In 2013, snow cover decreases by almost 49 \% area during the period 30 Sep to 15 Oct, whereas it increases by 133 \% area in the first sixteen days of November i.e. 1-16 Nov, as compared to the year 2003. Overall, the correlation between the year 2003 and 2013 SCAis found to be 0.87, which is highly positive correlation. Keywords: Climate change, MODIS data, NDSI, Snow cover, Upper Indus Basin Citedy By: 0 Study of frequency of anomalies in arrival of late or early monsoon and western disturbances due to climate change in Bahawalpur city from 1960-2012. Author: : Anwar, M. M. and Ilyas, S Journal: : Sindh University Research Journal,Vol.47(1),2015--Pages49--52 Abstract: Monsoon is the major system that brings heavy rainfall in South East Asia. Its timely arrival brings prosperity to the inhabitants while its delay or early arrival may cause disastrous droughts or floods. Global warming is disturbing the climatic factors and monsoon rainfall is not indifferent. Data of average monthly rainfall for 52 years from 1960-2012 was collected from the Meteorological Department of Pakistan. Global warming is agreed upon the phenomenon, hence its effects on the rainfall pattern is sure as these two variables are interlinked. This study is going to focus on the anomalies occur in rainfall pattern of monsoon and winter rainfall called Western Disturbances. This single variable was plotted decade wise to note the number of extreme rainfall on decadal time scale using an Excel worksheet. Two decades were plotted on one graph and summer and winter months are plotted on different graphs. At least one conspicuous peak value can be seen in each decade in both winter and summer rainfall. The findings of this study reveal that in the last 3 decades the anomalies are more frequent than the previous decades. Keywords: monsoon, climate change, Bahawalpur, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Analysis of streamflow data for trend detection on major rivers of the indus: analysis of stream Basin. Author: Naseem-Ur-Reman, M. S. Khattak, Sharif, M. and Khan, M. A. Journal: Journal of Himalayan Earth Sciences,Vol.48(1),2015--Pages99--111 Abstract: The main objective of this study is to evaluate discernible long term trends in stream flows of four major rovers of Pakistan, namely Kabul, Indus, Jhelum, and Chenab. For each river, the first hydrological station, where flow rate is measured after its entry to Pakistan, has been selected. The stations, thus selected on Kabul, Indus, Jhelum and Chenab are Warsak, Tarbela, Mangla and Marala, respectively. The average monthly flow data for each of the four stations was collected from Irrigation department, Lahore for the period 1962-2011. was conducted using the1962-2011. The annual as well as seasonal stream flows analysis of average monthly stream flows was conducted using the stream Mann Kendall non-parametric test. For each case, the trend slopes were estimated using the Sen`s slope method. A trend free pre-whitening (TFPW) approach was used to account for the auto correlation in the time flows and decreasing trends for summer series. Results indicate increasing trends for winter stream flows. For the spring season, Warsak exhibited decreasing trend, whereas the other stations showed a decreasing trends. Annual stream flow had a decreasing trend at all stations. The trends identified in this study may be partially attributed attributed to the effects of climate change in Pakistan. Keywords: Climate change, Stream, Trends, Citedy By: 0 Assessment of climate change at spatiao-temporal scales and its impact on stream flows in Mangla watershed. Author: Ghulam-Nabi andHabib-Ur-Rehman, M. Yaseen and Latif, M. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.15(2),2015--Pages17--36 Abstract: The Mangla reservoir was built for irrigation as well as power generation. The variability in climatic variables (temperature and precipitation) at spatial and temporal scales affects the streamflows. To consider the hydro-climatic unpredictability, 50 years (1961-2010) record was scrutinized. The time series were divided in two periods of 25 years each (1961-1985, 1st and 1986- 2010, 2nd). Results of the current investigation revealed that the mean temperature in annual as well as in spring, winter and autumn seasons has been increased however the summer temperature has decreased for the period 1961-2010. Declining trends were observed in annual temperature for the 1st period whereas 2nd period showed more warming. The results of annual and seasonal precipitation indicate that trends in the 1st period were not consistent while in the 2nd period trends were decreasing in all basins. The annual streamflows in rivers Kanshi, Poonch, Kunhar, Neelum, and Jhelum (at Azad Pattan) have decreased upto 41, 5, 34, 24 and 45 \% respectively with increase of 1 oC annual mean temperature for the period 1961-2010. On the other hand, trends in annual mean temperature showed cooling trends for the 1stperiod and this yield increased streamflow for rivers Kanshi, Kunhar, Neelum and Jhelum upto 21, 11, 4 and 10 \% respectively. In 2nd period, the annual mean temperature has increased in all the basins. The annual streamflows in rivers Kanshi, Poonch, Kunhar, Neelum, and Jhelum have decreased upto 46, 32, 43, 43 and 51 \% respectively. In 2nd period the streamflows in rivers Kanshi, Poonch, Kunhar, Neelum, and Jhelum have decreased upto 35, 37, 5, 11 and 11 \% in spring season with increase of 1 oC temperature. Divergent to this, there was a reverse situation in the 1stperiod for the spring season. The summer mean temperature has been decreased upto 1oC and the streamflows in rivers Poonch, Kunhar, Neelum and Jhelum have decreased upto 2, 11, 11 and 33 \% per decade respectively for the whole period. Similarly in the 2nd period the streamflows have reduced upto 29, 32, 12, 46 and 36 \% in rivers Kanshi, Poonch, Kunhar, Neelum and Jhelum respectively. The trends, caused by climate change, have impacts on the streamflows that should be considered by the water managers for the better water management in a water scarce country like Pakistan. Keywords: climate change, spatiao-temporal scales, stream flows, Mangla watershed. Citedy By: 0 Climate variability impacts on rice crop production in Pakistan. Author: Abdul-Saboor, U. Shakoor, Baig, I. and Abdul-Rahman, A. Afzal Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Research,Vol.28(1),2015--Pages19--27 Abstract: The climate variability has affected the agriculture production all over the globe. This concern has motivated important changes in the field of research during the last decade. Climate changes are believed to have declining effects towards crop production in Pakistan. This study carries an empirical investigation of the effects of climate change on rice crop of Pakistan by employing Vector Auto Regression (VAR) model. Annual seasonal data of the climatic variables from 1980 to 2013 has been used. Results confirmed that rising mean maximum temperature would lead to reduction in rice production while increase in mean minimum temperature would be advantageous towards rice production. Variation in mean minimum temperature brought about seven percent increase in rice productivity as shown by Variance Decomposition. Mean precipitation and mean temperature would increase rice production but simulations scenarios for 2030 confirmed that much increase in rainfall and mean temperature in long run will negatively affect rice production in future. It is therefore important to follow adequate policy action to safeguard crop productions from disastrous effects. Development of varieties resistant to high temperatures as well as droughts will definitely enhance resilience of rice crop in Pakistan. Keywords: Climate, rice crop, Pakistan, agricultiure Citedy By: 0 CO2 enrichment improves recovery of growth and photosynthesis from drought and nitrogen stress in maize. Author: Zong, Y. and Shangguan, Z. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,Vol.46(2),2014--Pages407--415 Abstract: In the context of the increasing risk of extreme drought as a result of climate change and increasing CO2 in the future of northwest China, evaluation of crops' ability to recover and survive droughts requires further attention. To test the effects of re-watering on plants suffering water and nitrogen limitations in the presence of elevated CO2, maize (Zea mays) was planted to experience combined elevated CO2 (380 or 750 $\mu$molmol-1, climate chamber), water stress (15 \% PEG-6000) and nitrogen limitation (5 or 15mM N in Hoagland solutions) and then re-watered at three levels (300mL, 600mL, 900mL per pot of distilled water). When plants were re-watered, drought stressed and N limited plants with ambient CO2 increased their water content more than that of elevated CO2, while the enhancement of growth rate were negatively related to the increasing plant water content. Elevated CO2 could help re-watered seedlings to have higher photosynthetic capacity (Fv/Fm, $\Phi$PSII, Pn,Pn/Tr and Pn/Gs) and new leaf growth under low water content, apart from nitrogen deficiency. The results demonstrated that elevated CO2 could help drought stressed seedlings to maintain higher carbon assimilation rates under low water content, as a result to improve leaf water use efficiency. Keywords: CO2 enrichment, photosynthesis, drought, nitrogen stress, maize. Citedy By: 0 Temporal analysis of temperature trends in the metropolitan area of Lahore, Pakistan. Author: Zia, S., Shirazi, S. A., Bhalli, M. N. and Alam, R. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Science,Vol.66(1),2014--Pages83--87 Abstract: The impact of temperature change has been analyzed which has diverse effects on global, regional, and local scale. It is a significant step for planning climate change strategy. This research aims to investigate temperature trends on seasonal and annual basis for five decades (1962-2012) of Lahore metropolitan area (LMA) which covers an area of about 2306 sq. km. In order to detect trends in temperature time series, linear regression test of parametric statistics has been applied. Temperature variables included mean (MAT), mean maximum (MMxT), and mean minimum (MMiT), which were considered for analyzing both on annual and seasonal basis. Anomalies of temperature were plotted and it was observed that percent of annual mean temperature, and mean minimum temperature were increased at the rate of 2.5 and 5.5 percent per year, respectively. While, Mean Maximum temperature had decreased at the rate of 0.6 percent a year. Each year was divided into four seasons, (a) winter, (b) hot-dry spring, (c) monsoon and (d) post-monsoon. The percentages of significant trends obtained for each parameter in the different seasons, showed an increasing temperature trend during eight months of year except in June to September where non-significant temperature trends were observed. Keywords: Temporal analysis, temperature, metropolitan, Lahore Citedy By: 0 Water and Maize: water conservation through Stem reserves mobilization. Author: Taufiqullah and Noorka, I. R. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Applied Sciences,Vol.6(2),2014--Pages155--163 Abstract: Food security in the world is challenged by increasing food demand and provision of less supply mainly due to declining water availability. Maize is the third most important world cereal crop. It is one of the major components of human food and animal feed thus grown for both grain and forage purposes in human as well as livestock sector. The demand for maize has also increased significantly due to rapid development of poultry and animal feed industries. Combining ability analysis provides information for characters related to drought tolerance. Stem reserve can be exploited to combat water stress condition. To achieve this after 14 days of anthesis, plants were defoliated followed by complete plant surface bleaching by spray of commercial market bleach diluted with tap water 4 times solution. The total assimilation of photo-synthetase in the seeds was result of remobilization of reserves in different parts of the plant. The best combinations among diverse genotypes with good amount of stem reserve mobilization in the face of climate change and scarce water may be the best success to ensure food security and law and order throughout the world. Keywords: Maize, water conservation, Stem reserves mobilization Citedy By: 0 Emission and role of biogenic volatile organic compounds in biosphere. Author: Saleem, A. R., Waqar-Un-Nisa, T. Mahmood and Aslam, M. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.19(1-2),2014--Pages69--78 Abstract: Plants are an essential part of the biosphere. Under the influence of climate change, plants respond in multiple ways within the ecosystem. One such way is the release of assimilated carbon back to the atmosphere in form of biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs), which are produced by plants and are involved in plant growth, reproduction, defense and other . These compounds are emitted from vegetation into the atmosphere under different environmental situations. Plants produce an extensive range of BVOCs, including isoprenoids, sequisterpenes, aldehydes, alcohols and terpenes in different tissues above and below the ground. The emission rates vary with various environmental conditions and the plant growth stage in its life span. BVOCs are released under biotic and abiotic stress changes, like heat, drought, land-use changes, higher atmospheric CO concentrations, increased UV radiation and insect or disease attack. Plants emit BVOCs in atmosphere in order to avoid stress, and adapt to harsh circumstances. These compounds also have a significant role in plant-plant interaction, communication and competition. BVOCs have the ability to alter atmospheric chemistry; they readily react with atmospheric pollutant gases under high temperature and form tropospheric ozone, which is a potent air pollutant for global warming and disease occurrence. BVOCs may be a cause of photochemical smog and increase the stay of other GHGs in the atmosphere. Therefore, further study is required to assess the behavior of BVOCs in the biosphere as well as the atmosphere. Keywords: BVOCs, Abiotic, Biotic, Atmosphere and Stress. Citedy By: 0 Phenotypic response of rice (Oryza sativa) genotypes to variable moisture stress regimes. Author: Sabar, M. and Arif, M. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.16(1),2014--Pages32--40 Abstract: Water stress in a climate change scenario is one of the major threats for sustainable rice productivity. A certain level of drought can cause considerable yield losses. Combining drought resistance with yield potential is the most promising challenge for the rice breeders. The present study was conducted using eight rice genotypes of diverse origin to explore their response against variable drought stress. Two water stress treatments for one week and two weeks were given sixty days after seeding. Significant differences for genotypes and water stress levels were observed from phenotypic performance. Correlation studies indicated a positive and significant association of paddy yield with spikelet fertility and 1000 grain weight. Rice genotype IR55419-04 showed least effect of water stress treatments for 1000 grain weight i.e., 6.28 \% and 10.44 \% reduction, spikelet fertility percentage with 19.99 \% and 40.01 \% reduction and the paddy yield per plant of 24.97 \% and 51.35 \% under one week and two weeks water stress, respectively. On contrary, Basmati 2000 and Super Basmati were found to be the most sensitive to drought for paddy yield with 92.8 \% and 91.5 \% reduction under severe water stress given for two weeks, respectively. The existence of enough amount of genetic variability might be a result of diverse source of the present stock. Rice strain IR55419-04' showed the potential for drought stress tolerance amongst all the tested genotypes and needs attention of the breeders to explore the genetic tolerance through modern mapping techniques and then incorporating it through advance biotechnological approaches like marker assisted backcrossing into elite varieties. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Epidemiology, determinants and dynamics of cholera in Pakistan: Gaps and prospects for future research. Author: Naseer, M. and Jamali, T. Journal: Journal of College of Physicians and Surgeons Pakistan,Vol.24(11),2014--Pages855--860 Abstract: Cholera is one of the notifiable endemic diseases in Pakistan, but the reporting of cholera cases is still unsatisfactory. Most of the diagnosed cases are never reported to the relevant authorities. In the year 1993 - 2005, the country did not report any single case of cholera to the WHO. The objectives of this review were to understand the epidemiology and to identify the possible determinants of cholera infection in Pakistan. Medscape, Medline, PakMedinet and PubMed, was searched, using key words, epidemiology and determinants of cholera infection in Pakistan during 1995 - 2010. Morbidity and mortality due to cholera infection during 1995 - 2010, without any language restriction. Out of 27 articles published between 1995 - 2010, 17 articles were included in the review. Vibrio cholerae O139 identified as a major cause of infection in older age group, while O1 biotype of cholera as a predominant cause of cholera among young individuals. Mainly reported determinants of cholera in Pakistan include poor sanitation and hygiene practices, increased population density in urban areas, leading to rapid and unplanned urbanization of the major cities and climate change due to increased environmental pollution in Pakistan are plausible factors for endemicity of cholera in Pakistan. Cholera reporting as a notifiable disease to the relevant departments and timely action can prevent the risk of outbreaks. There is a need to identify specific behavioral and environmental determinants responsible for outbreaks and epidemics of cholera in Pakistan which can help to design appropriate preventive and control interventions. Keywords: Epidemiology, cholera, cimate change, urbanization, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Assessment of weather indicators for possible climate change. Author: : Maqsood, H., Ahmed, S. I. and Ahmed, S. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.20(1),2014--Pages23--33 Abstract: From 20th century onwards, a great concern has been expressed regarding global climate change. This study attempts to perform detailed analysis of temperature and precipitation for Karachi city of Pakistan, to assess the possible climate change, using two data sets (51-year data: 1961-2012 and 31- year data: 1981-2012) for different parameters. Trends were generated using linear regression (LR) and Mann-Kendall (MK), which depicted that daily and annual temperatures were increasing, with changes in minimum temperature being more significant than maximum temperature. Analyses also showed increase in extreme temperature at night and during winter, showing that urbanization was a major factor, as the heat from buildings trapped in between dissipates at nights. The daily and monthly precipitation levels increased in contrast to annual precipitation trend, which is justified by the averaged monthly analysis showing that decreasing trends were much more significant than increasing trends. In addition, monthly precipitation showed an increase of 4.3 mm, using LR and MK test. It can be noticed that two extreme winter months (December and January) and two extreme hot months (May and October) received increased rainfall. However, statistical analyses showed overall annual decrease in rainfall. Furthermore, decadal analysis indicated sinusoidal behaviour of change in climate indicators; making climatic change evident but cyclic in nature. Keywords: Assessment, weather indicators, climate change, Karachi, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Environmental impact of climate change in Pakistan. Author: Khan, S. and Raja, I. A. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.20(1),2014--Pages15--22 Abstract: Climate change results in the increase or decrease in temperature and rainfall. These have significant impact on environment impinge agricultural crop yields, affect human health, cause changes to forests and other ecosystems, and even impact our energy supply. Climate change is a global phenomenon and its impact can be observed on Pakistan's economy and environment. This paper contains details concerning the climate change and environmental impacts. It takes into account current and projected key vulnerabilities, prospects for adaptation, and the relationships between climate change mitigation and environment. The purpose of the study is to devise national policies and incentive systems combined with national level capacity-building programs to encourage demand-oriented conservation technologies. Recommendations are also made to abate the climate change related issues in country. Keywords: Environmental impact, climate change, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Effects of drought stress and sward botanical composition on the nutritive value of grassland herbage. Author: Kchenmeister, F., Kchenmeister, K., Kayser, M., Wrage-Mnnig, N. and Isselstein, J. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.16(4),2014--Pages715--722 Abstract: The predicted increase of drought incidents even in temperate climates might affect not only yield but the nutritive value of grassland herbage as well. It is not yet clear whether species richness or functional group composition could mitigate a possibly negative reaction of the nutritive value to drought. Here, we report findings of a study investigating the effects of drought stress, species richness (one to five species) and functional group composition (grass, for b and legume) on nutritive value (crude protein, water-soluble carbohydrates, neutral detergent fiber, acid detergent fiber) of herbage under semi controlled conditions in a vegetation hall. Moderate or strong drought was imposed on plants in one growing season and followed by a recovery period. Drought had no or minor immediate or residual effects on nutritive value, and there was no interaction of species richness or functional group with drought. However, functional group and seasonal variation distinctively influenced the nutritive value of herbage. It was concluded that under conditions of climate change with drought stress events, yield decreases in grassland seem to be by far more important than changes in nutritive value. Keywords: drought stress, botanical composition, nutritive value, grassland herbage. Citedy By: 0 A review on bio-butyric acid production and its optimization. Author: Jha, A. K., Li, J., Yuan, Y., Baral, N. and Ali, B. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.16(5),2014--Pages1019--1024 Abstract: Butyric acid is treated as one of the renewable green fuels of tomorrow due to its high energy content, and it can reduce health and environmental issues including emission of greenhouse gases, global warming and climate change. The production of bio-butyric acid by microbial fermentation is not cost-effective and economically competitive due to its production at a relatively low concentration, yield, and rate. In order to enhance the economics of the fermentation method, the butyrate production should increase using economical substrate, favorable pretreatment techniques, multicultural stains and fermentation conditions. In order for further investigation and improvement in butyric acid production, batch, repeated batch, fed batch and continuous type butyric acid fermentation of biomass have been discussed in this review. Keywords: bio-butyric acid production, renewable green fuels, optimization, biomass Citedy By: 0 Co emission and agricultural productivity 2 in southeast Asian region: A pooled mean group estimation. Author: Islam, M. S., Tarique, K. M. and Sohag, K. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.20(1),2014--Pages93--99 Abstract: Frequent natural calamities, extreme climatic events and unexpected seasonal changes are the obvious examples of global warming. Carbon emissions by industrial units all over the world are believed to be the major contributor of the global warming that can lead to reduced agricultural productivity. This paper examines the impact of CO emission on agricultural 2 productivity in Southeast Asian countries. It investigates the dynamic relationship between CO 2 emission (along with other control-variables) and agricultural output using panel data set comprising data from Southeast Asian countries. Following the dynamic heterogeneous panel techniques developed by Pesaran and Shin (1999) for estimating the shortrun and long-run effects using autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) model in the error correction form, the study then estimated the empirical model based on pooled mean group (PMG) estimator. The study found that increased CO emission resulted in 2 higher agricultural productivity because of the fact that farmers around the globe quickly adapt to climate change. In addition, use of submersible pump and other capital machineries significantly increased agricultural yield and led to reduced dependency on human capital, while use of chemical fertilizers increased productivity in short-run but had a harmful impact in the long-run. Keywords: Co emission, agricultural productivity, southeast Asia, climate change. Citedy By: 0 Historical and future trends of summer mean air temperature over south Asia. Author: Iqbal, W. and Zahid, M. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.10(20),2014--Pages67--74 Abstract: Mean air temperature is an important meteorological parameter. The signal of climate change is often describe by the changes in the mean temperature. Keeping in view the importance of the mean air temperature, in this study we used twenty four CMIP5 GCMs to analyze the future changes in summer (June July August September) mean air temperature. The historical run of the GCMs were first compared with the ERA Interim mean temperature for the period 1979-2005. The spatial analysis shows the warm biases of the GCMs over the plain areas and cold biases over the mountainous regions. Taylor diagram analysis shows that most of the GCMs are in good accordance with the ERA Interim mean air temperature for the summer season. The future projections of the selected GCMs were then presented in mulitmodel ensemble for each decade from 2011-2100. The change has in increasing trend all over the study area. The significant change has been projected for the northern and north western parts of Pakistan and south eastern India region. The change in mean temperature is below 4C under RCP 4.5 whereas it is above 5 C under RCP 8.5. Multimodel ensemble of CMIP5 GCMs projections for the future under both the RCPs, show higher spread over the northern and central parts of Pakistan; and central India. Projected change is robust and it is anticipated that this increase will enhance the erratic behavior of the monsoon in future. Keywords: Historical trends, future trends,summer mean air temperature, south Asia. Citedy By: 0 An Analytical Study of the Variations in the Monsoon Patterns over Pakistan. Author: Imran, A., Zaman, Q., Rasul, G. and Mahmood, A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.10(20),2014--Pages25--37 Abstract: In the recent era, the climate change has not only triggered the extreme weather events but also brought uncertainties in the behavior of certain weather phenomenon. These variations in the weather patterns are very significant in their consequences. So to enhance the understanding of these uncertainties, the study of these variations is of utmost importance. This study is carried out to investigate the variations in the precipitation patterns over the major monsoon belt of Pakistan during the summer monsoon period. Frequency of extreme precipitation events, onset, withdrawal, duration of monsoon season, total amount of rainfall during the season and total number of rainy days, all these parameters are the key factors not only in understanding the uncertainties caused by the climate change but also from the socio-economic point of view. Daily rainfall observed data is used to compute the above mentioned parameters of the monsoon system. Islamabad has a high frequency of extreme events with rainfall 50 mm, 100 mm or more per day, as compared to the other stations of the same monsoon belt. Southeastern part of the country experiences a trend towards increasing frequency of such extreme events during the last decade. In the northeast, Lahore is the only station where the duration of the monsoon season is increasing significantly. Southeastern monsoon belt has a suppressing trend in terms of the duration of the summer monsoon. Generally the northeastern stations show a direct relationship between the variation of the total amount of rainfall and number of rainy days. Stations located in the southeastern monsoon belt of the country exhibits a trend towards the occurrence of extreme precipitation events as the number of rainy days are not increasing accordingly with the amount of rainfall. Keywords: Analytical Study, Variations, Monsoon Patterns, Pakistan. Citedy By: 0 Wind speed analysis of some coastal areas near Karachi. Author: Hussain, M. A., Abbas, S., Ansari, M. R. K., Zaffar, A. and Jan, B. Journal: Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences,Vol.51(1),2014--Pages83--91 Abstract: This communication attempts to analyze Karachi coastal area (Paradise Point 24.84 \textordmasculine E, 66.77 \textordmasculine N)) for an understanding of underlying probability distribution. It has been found that at this site the annual wind speed at a height of 30 meters remains very close to 7 m/s whereas at a height of 61 meters the wind speed reaches to 9 m/s. Moreover, the wind mostly remains directed towards southwest. Furthermore, the annual average wind speed follows Weibull distribution and the annual average wind speed goes on increasing with the passage of time. Maximum energy together with the energy density for different values of the wind mill blade diameters is also calculated. Our analysis shows that the wind speed is increasing as a consequence of global climate change. Though the global climate change has created many threats to the humanity by influencing the local urban microclimate but the positive aspect of this finding is that the increase in wind speed will increase the feasibility and economic viability of the construction of wind farms near Karachi coast and offshore. Of course these calculations will be useful for urban and energy planners. Keywords: Wind speed analysis, energy density, coastal areas, global climate change, Karachi, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Temperature and Precipitation GLOF Triggering Indicators in Gilgit-Baltistan, Pakistan. Author: Din, K., Tariq, S., Mahmood, A. and Rasul, G. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology,Vol.10(20),2014--Pages39--56 Abstract: GLOFs are some of climate change induced hazards which are most common in Gilgit-Baltistan. Gilgit-Baltistan has observed more than 35 GLOF events in the last 200 years history but their frequency has increased in the recent years with five GLOF events in the Gojal Valley (Upper Hunza) during the year 2008. In order to study the relation of GLOF events with weather conditions, well known GLOF events for the period from 1990 to 2012 were selected and two type of meteorological data sets, real time and reanalyzed data has been used. This paper suggests that among other factors, temperature and precipitation (Rain fall) plays the role to enhance the probability of outburst of a lake resulting in a GLOF. Most of GLOF events occurred in Gilgit-Baltistan during the study period have been found to have linked with extreme weather conditions, i.e. either there was an abrupt rise in temperature, heat wave or rain fall a short time before or during the GLOF phenomenon. GLOF hazards can be reduced and risks to the communities can be minimized by continuous Hydro-meteorological monitoring of the affected areas. Keywords: Temperature, Precipitation, GLOF Triggering Indicators, Gilgit-Baltistan, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Review article current status of Ulmus wallichiana: Himalayan endangered elm. Author: Journal: BUITEMS Journal of Applied and Emerging Sciences,Vol.3(2),2014--Pages60--65 Abstract: Ulmus wallichiana is important traditional and endangered plant species of western Himalaya used for treatment of fractured bones in animals as well as human being. The U. wallichiana (Planchon) is a mountain tree ranging from central Nuristan in Afghanistan, through Northern Pakistan and Northern India to western Nepal at elevations from 800 m to 3000 m. In Pakistan restricted to Nandiar and Hillian sub valleys of district Battagram between 1300 to 2000 m., U. wallichana is found in spruce pine, temperate and lower temperate forest area. The Himalayan Elm grows to 30 m tall, with a broad crown featuring several ascending branches. Mostly flowers exist in a clusters form on branches and maximum flowering offers during March. A strong fibre is obtained from the inner bark. Plant is used for cordage, slow matches and sandals. Chemical investigation of U. wallichiana revealed flavonoides present in stem bark. In IUCN red list U. wallichiana falls in vulnerable category. However, U. wallichiana falls under criteria D of critically endangered species in Pakistan as only 44 mature individuals were found in different parts of district Battagram. There are number of threats responsible for decrease in U. wallichiana number in western Himalayan which may include deforestation, over exploitation and climate changes. Conservation strategies need to follow and improve number of U. wallichiana number. U. wallichiana has the potential to prevent and treat osteoporosis, so an attempt should be made to conserve this important plant species with possible ant osteoporosis properties. Keywords: Ulmus wallichiana, Himalayan endangered elm, climate change, deforestation, Citedy By: 0 Economic deprivation of Indus river delta, Sindh, Pakistan: Causes and suggestions. Author: Anwar, M. M., Chandio, N. H. and Bhalli, M. N. Journal: Science International,Vol.26(2),2014--Pages885--890 Abstract: Economic losses of the Indus River Delta are constantly increasing since the last two decades. Due to climate change and construction of different projects on River Indus, there has been a decreased flow of fresh water in the river. Mangroves are washed away from the region as 38 \% area of the delta has been reduced due to shortage of freshwater below the Kotri barrage. Brackish water of the Arabian Sea is increasing due to the intrusion of seawater and the production of fish, crops, fruit, and mangrove forests are decreasing. To study the causes of economic deprivation of the delta, soils and water samples were collected from eight different locations of the delta for pH, EC and TDS analyses. Laboratory analyzed data shows that TDS, ranging from 29000 to 42000 and salinity affects the growth of crop plants. Fish and mangrove forests are also being destroyed due to high salinity and shortage of freshwater. Freshwater in the river may push backward the seawater intrusion and will aid the survival of the mangrove forests and crops. So, the Government should develop fair water policies and laws to discourage construction of any project reducing water flow and enhancing seawater intrusion in the delta. Keywords: Economic deprivation,Indus river delta, Mangrooves, policies, Sindh, Pakistan, Citedy By: 0 Climate change and human security in South Asia. Author: Abdul-Hamid, N. Akrami Journal: Science International,Vol.26(2),2014--Pages801--808 Abstract: Climate change has a direct bearing on the two essential components of human security freedom from fear? and freedom from want.? Natural disasters occurring from extreme weather lead to both fear? and want.? In the context of South Asian countries, there are at least two components of human security that are likely to be affected severely by climate change food security and health security. The present study is an attempt to fill the existing gap in literature by exploring the impacts of climate change on human security in South Asia. By using the panel data of the four South Asian countries for the period 1973-2009, study finds that health is negatively affected by an increase in temperature and precipitation. Similarly, an increase in temperature tends to reduce the availability of food; however, an increase in precipitation tends to increase the availability of food. Study also finds that inflation has negative relationships with availability of food and health, revealing that due to average low income of people in South Asia, inflation tends to affect their affordability of health and food items. It was also found that Per Capita GDP and openness has a positive impact on health and food security indicators. Keywords: Climate change, human security, South Asia. Citedy By: 0 Use of crop growth models in agriculture: A review. Author: Ahmad, M. I., Ali, A., Ali, M. A., Khan, S. R., Hassan, S. W. and Javed, M. M. Journal: Science International,Vol.26(1),2014--Pages331--334 Abstract: Crop Modeling is an artistic tool for risk management in Agriculture. Climate change, climate variability, carbon sequestration, long-term food security and environmental sustainability have become important issues in current scenario. Computer simulation models can make a valuable contribution to our understanding of the processes that determine crop responses and predict crop performance. Simulation models greatly facilitate the task of optimizing crop growth and deriving recommendations concerning crop management. They can also be used to determine the potential impact of climate change on future crop productivity, Climate smart agriculture development, mitigation and adaptation strategies. Climate variations, continuously increasing population pressure and market infrastructures are driven forces to reduce agricultural productivity. New management options and appropriate genotypes are need of the day to be considered for sustainable production. Crop simulation models are complementary tools in field experiments to develop innovative crop management systems. In this perspective, two crop growth models viz., APSM (Agricultural Production System Simulator) and DSSAT (Decision Support System for Agro Technology Transfer) were calibrated and validated to predict growth and yield under rainfed conditions for pothwar region of Pakistan. Keywords: crop growth models, Climate smart agriculture, Climate change, climate variability, carbon sequestration, long-term food security, environmental sustainability Citedy By: 0 a Regional Comparison between Global Circulation Model GCM20 and Regional Climate Model PRECIS. Author: Ahmad, B., Rasul, G., Iqbal, W. and Bukhari, S. A. A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology,Vol.11(21),2014--Pages39--51 Abstract: A super high resolution Global Circulation Model GCM20 (20 Km horizontal resolution) of Meteorological Research Institute, Tsukuba, Japan, is compared spatially and temporally with the UK's Hadley center Regional Climate Model (RCM) viz. Providing Regional Climate for Impact Studies (PRECIS) to investigate climate change scenarios and biases that lie within. Data Analysis and Integration System (DIAS) was accessed to obtain GCM20 data while for PRECIS data, simulations were done under the A1B scenario at a horizontal resolution of 0.22 degrees (25 Km approx.) with the boundary data from European GCM ECHAM5. Three different time scales were selected from both models- the baseline (1979-1998), present and near future (2007-2027) and the far future (2080-2099). Comparisons were made for the domain 20 N-40 N and 60 E-80 E including Pakistan, Afghanistan and climate active regions of Hindu Kush, Karakoram and Himalayas. Analysis of both the models suggests that the areas covering the monsoon belt shall receive less warming effects than those which seldom receives it. Moreover regions with higher terrain shall receive relatively greater warming in the near and far future. Magnitude of the temperature increase in the near future relative to baseline for GCM20 suggests a 1 C-1.5 C rise whereas for PRECIS it suggests a 1.5 C-2 C rise in the region. Both GCM20 and PRECIS, in the near and far future, show a relative precipitation increase (0.5 mm/day and 1 mm/day respectively) in the extreme North region of the domain. Keywords: Global Circulation Model GCM20, Regional Climate Model PRECIS Citedy By: 0 Medicinal plants after forest disturbance, restoration and cultivation in Pakistani Himalaya Author: Adnan, M., Tariq, A., Begum, S. and Ullah, A. Journal: Int J of Agric Biol.,Vol.16(5),2014--Pages1006-1010 Abstract: Himalayan forests of Pakistan are subjected to various anthropogenic pressures, which have resulted in the extinction of several medicinal plants important for rural livelihood as food, healthcare and income. The study was carried out at Ayubia National Park with the objectives (i) to assess the abundance of selected medicinal plant species in disturbed, undisturbed and restored forests, and (ii) to evaluate the cultivation potential of highly valuable medicinal plant species. In the first step, 15 plots were randomly assigned each to three forest types, in which the abundance of five medicinal herbs was assessed. Secondly, five locally valuable species were cultivated each in three replications of 1 m2 area in agroforest. Density of medicinal plants such as Bergenia ciliata was the highest in undisturbed forest (4.3 m-2), intermediate under restored forest (1.8 m-2) and the lowest under disturbed forest (01 m-2). Podophyllum emodi and Paeonia emodi were found absent from the disturbed forest, while encountered in restored forest. Species such as B. ciliata showed higher production and economic gains (18 US$) on agroforest plot (1 m2 ). In conclusion, forest restoration has the potential to recover extinct medicinal plant species and can provide local support for forest expansion in the region. In addition, introduction of medicinal plants cultivation into the agricultural system may represent an opportunity for the conservation of such species in the wild and improving rural livelihood. Above all, the application of present study on a wider scale may help in mitigating the adverse effects of climate change on food security and may also ensure their sustained supply. 2014 Friends Science Publishers Keywords: Herbs; Forest types; Density; Agricultural production; Livelihood Citedy By: 0 Impact of South Asian high variability on monsoon precipitation in Pakistan. Author: Zahid, M. and Rasul, G. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.10(19),2013--Pages1--10 Abstract: The South Asian High (SAH) variability is known to have significant contribution in the success and failure of summer monsoon precipitation (JAS) of Pakistan situated within South Asia. This study aims to analyze the impact of South Asian High (SAH) variability on the summer monsoon precipitation in Pakistan. The principal component analysis shows strong positive temporal correlation coefficient between SAH (200 hPa) and monsoon (JAS) precipitation i.e. 0.7 for the period 1980-2010. The streamline and precipitation analysis shows that Pakistan receives heavy precipitation during strong SAH years (1988, 1992, 1994, 2010) due to westward (70E-80E) movement of SAH from its mean position and experience suppress precipitation during weak SAH year (1987, 1997, 2004, 2009) due to eastward (90E-110E) oscillation of SAH. The isotherms analysis shows negative anomalies in strong SAH years and positive anomalies in weak SAH years over most parts of Pakistan. The minimum values of divergence of moisture flux (DMF) at 850 hPa in strong SAH years and nil DMF in weak SAH years has been observed over western parts of Pakistan. The wind field (850 hPa) analysis has shown the evident stimulation of moisture from Arabian Sea incase of strong SAH years and quite minute stimulation of moisture in weak SAH years. Hence, it is evident from the study that the strength and oscillation of SAH and summer monsoon precipitation (JAS) in Pakistan are strongly inter-reliant upon each other. It is anticipated that climate change can lead the country towards extreme droughts and extreme flooding. This study will be helpful for the forecasters who can use the behavior of SAH (Tibetan High) as an indicator for prediction of intense and weak summer monsoon rainfall. Keywords: Moisture flux, Monsoon, Pakistan, Precipitation, South Asian High Citedy By: 0 Seasonal variation of rainy days in Pakistan. Author: Naheed, G., Kazmi, D. H. and Rasul, G. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.9(18),2013--Pages9--13 Abstract: Monsoon precipitation (one of the major rainfall systems of the country) is the lifeline of Pakistan's water resources which falls in summer from July to September. It not only caters the peak power supply demands but also fulfills the highest water demands of field crops and gathers the reserves to meet the requirements during low flow periods in next 4-5 months. Winter brings lot of snow over the northern mountains which melts in early summer and maintains the sustainable river flows for power generation and irrigation before the onset of the summer monsoon. Climate change has imposed rather negative impacts on the rainfall systems of the country, mainly by demolishing the seasonal rainfalls or by modifying its intensity. El \~ Nino induced shortfall of precipitation triggered Pakistan history's worst drought in terms of length and intensity, afterward a rising trend is being followed, embedded by increased frequency of heavy downpour events. In the present study the main focus was on the rainfall frequency by incorporating the rainy days equal to or more than 2.5 millimeters. Daily data of last 50 years for all the available meteorological stations was incorporated. All parts of the country were analyzed equally and it revealed that the upper parts of Khyber Pakhnoonkhwa province and the northern areas are the main vulnerable, with slope of trend line more than 2 either positive or negative. The said areas are not only vital for the agriculture sector as well as for the hydrological cycle of the country. Keywords: El nino, Monsoon, Pakistan, Precipitation, Rainy days, Seasonal variation Citedy By: 0 Flow variation in Astore river under assumed glaciated extents due to climate change. Author: Naeem, U. A., Hashmi, H. N., Shamim, M. A. and Ejaz, N. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.11(1),2013--Pages73--81 Abstract: Various researchers have concluded the existence of many glaciers in doubt by the end of this century due to global warming phenomenon. The great Himalayas are also under such stress. The recent acceleration in rainfall pattern resulted the ever worst destruction due to floods (2010) in Pakistan. Many Watershed models, capable of incorporating the climate change scenarios have been developed in this regard to predict the future flows. But it is not easy to select the most appropriate model for a particular watershed to get the best results. In this regard, the paper is an effort where the analysis has been made on Astore Watershed, Pakistan, by considering the model results obtained from the three watershed models i.e. UBC Watershed Model, HBV-Met and HBV-PRECIS. The results are obtained by considering different glaciated extents of 100 \% , 50 \% and 0 \% under future climate scenario (SRES A2), simulated by PRECIS Regional Climate Model for (2071-2100). For changed climate scenario, discharges for the simulations at 100 \% reduction in glaciated area were -72 \% , -15 \% and -46 \% for HBV-Met, HBV-PRECIS and UBC Watershed Model respectively. Keywords: Astore watershed, Glacier modeling, Glaciers, Retreating glacial extent, Snowmelt modeling, UBCWM Citedy By: 0 Hydraulic performance evaluation of pressure compensating (PC) emitters and micro-tubing for drip irrigation system. Author: Mangrio, A. G., Asif, M., Ahmed, E., Sabir, M. W., Khan, T. and Jahangir, I. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.32(4),2013--Pages290--298 Abstract: Drip irrigation system is necessary for those areas, where the water scarcity issues are present. The present study was conducted at the field station of Climate Change, Alternate Energy and Water Resources Institute (CAEWRI), National Agricultural Research Center (NARC), Islamabad, during 2013, regarding drip irrigation system. Drip irrigation system depends on uniform emitter application flow. All the emitters were tested and replicated thrice at pressure head (34 to 207Kpa) with an increment of 34 Kpa. The minimum and maximum discharges were 1.32 - 3.52, 3.36 - 5.42, and 43.22 - 100.99 Lph, with an average of 2.42, 4.63 and 73.66 Lph, for Bow Smith, RIS and Micro-tubing, respectively. It indicates that more than 90 \% of emission uniformity (EU) and uniformity coefficient (CU) for all Emitters, which shows excellent water application with least standard deviation, ranging 0.12 to 2.37, throughout the operating pressure heads in all emitters. An average coefficient of variation (CV) of all emitters were behaving less than 0.07, indicating an excellent class at all operating pressure heads between 34 to 207 Kpa. Moreover, the relationship of discharge and pressure of emitters indicates that discharge increased with the increase of pressure head. The Q-H curve plays key role in the selection of emitters. Keywords: Discharge, Drip irrigation, Emitters, Hydraulic performance, Micro-tubing, Pressure, Uniformity Citedy By: 0 Perturbations of modeling and forecast of Karachi coastal region seawater. Author: Hussain, M. A., Abbas, S., Ansari, M. R. K. and Zaffar, A. Journal: Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences,Vol.50(3),2013--Pages235--245 Abstract: Global warming is now a stark reality affecting the humanity in many hazardous ways. Continuous floods in Pakistan in past two years are an eye opener in this regard. A great loss of property, agriculture and life as a result of these floods suggests for an intelligent monitoring of the future projections of climate change and global warming. This is necessary because the harmful impacts of natural hazards can be coped and alleviated with a good planning in advance. This monitoring demands for enhanced forecasting capabilities, use of better analytical techniques and a clear determination and study of the controlling factors. Karachi is a coastal city which is also the industrial hub of Pakistan. Moreover, it is among one of the largest metropolitans of the world. So expectedly is most suitable for the study of high level of complex natural and anthropogenic activities. It is peculiar in the sense that it has two summer seasons, a situation scarcely observable on the globe. Here, summer season seawater temperature fluctuations are studied with the help of Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (SARIMA) models and short- and long-term forecasts are made. Our short-term forecasts determine months for the summer wise temperature extremes. It appears that the months of May, June, July and August are the months of extreme temperature for the first summer and October is the month of extreme temperature for the second summer. The long-term forecasts predict that 2014, 2016, 2018, and 2019 will be the years of warm summers. The analysis appearing here would be useful for coastal-urban planners in emphasizing the impact of seawater extreme temperatures on urban industrial activities, etc. Keywords: Global warming, Karachi, Modelling, Pakistan, Perturbations, SARIMA model, Seawater extreme temperatures Citedy By: 0 Effect of climatic change scenerio on reproductive behaviour of some fodder grasses growing wild in Pakistan. Author: Husain, T., Ahmed, M., Hussain, A. and Nazim, K. Journal: FUUAST Journal of Biology,Vol.2(2),2013--Pages85--90 Abstract: The main objective of this study was to see the behavior of some fodder grass in global warming situation. In this regard the estimation of florets formation, sex distribution, anthesis, pollen fertility, pollen germination, seed set and seed germination of Apluda mutica L., Bothriocloa ischaemum (L) Keng, Chrysopogon aucheri (Boiss.)Stapf., C. serrulatusTrin., Cymbopogon caesius (Nees ex Hook. \& Arn.) Stapf., C.jwarancusa (Jones,) Schult, C.martinii (Roxb.) Wat., C.commutatus (Steud.) Stapf., Dichanthiumannulatum (Forssk.) Stapf., Hyparrheniahirta (L.) Stapf., Sorghumhalepense (L.) Pers. and Themedaanathera (Nees) Hack. were investigated. These plants were collected from various climatic areas of Pakistan. The results demonstrated that the highest number (348) of florets per inflorescence were found in Cymbopogonjwarancusa(Jones) Schult.from Nathiagally while lowest (135 50) were seen in Apludamutica from Kallar Kahar Hill. Former species and Bothriochloa produced largest amount of barren florets. It is shown that from November to February the anthesis started early at 6:00AM in Cymbopogon spp. and Sorghum halepense, while Chrysopogon aucheri at 8:00AM. In Cymbopogon spp. and Sorghumhalepense (L.) Pers. it started hour early during March to May and terminated at 7:00AM, however in Cymbopogonaucheri the anthesis time was from 7:30AM to 8:30AM in the same months. To summarize the anthesis behavior in these grasses, generally it started from 6:00AM morning and continued up to 8:30AM, generally. Except Hyperrhenia, Dicanthium and Cymbopogonjwarancusa, all grasses produced 85 \% viable pollen grains. Pollen germination significantly increases with increase temperature in some cases. Seed set is poor with higher percentage of seed germination. It is evident that even in considerably higher temperature these grasses show normal behavior. Therefore it is suggested that there should be no negative impact of climate change on these grasses. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Climate change and precipitation in Pakistan -A meteorological prospect. Author: Gadiwalal, M. S. and Burke, F. Journal: International Journal of Economic and Environmental Geology,Vol.4(2),2013--Pages10--15 Abstract: Pakistan has suffered prolonged periods of precipitation fluctuation that kept going on for decades. Shifting between such periods in northern and southern parts of the country often appears as a pace change. The object of this study is to assess prior changes in climatic patterns over various regions of Pakistan and the future magnitudinal changes of climate that would impact on water resources, which subsequently affect the ecosystem, health, food supply and country`s water resource sustainability. Trend and variability analysis have been applied on countrywide meteorological data for the period 1961-2010. The study revealed an increasing trend of 0.660C in temperature and heavy and intense trend of 106 mm in precipitation during the past 110 years that has exacerbated food and water supply demand in the southern part of the country. This increasing heat of 0.060C per decade speeds up the water cycle and evapo-transpiration processes. Atmospheric vapour pressure tendency has also demonstrated increasing trend of 0.96 mm per anum in water cycle. Extreme weather events resulting in droughts and floods reflect changes in climate. Pakistan has to combat water shortage by improving water reservoirs, regulating river water flow and adoption of other water conservation techniques to manage food and water supply - demand. Keywords: Climate change, precipitation, Pakistan, meteorological prospect Citedy By: 0 Use of environmental isotopes to study the effect of climate change on Passu glacier. Author: Butt, S., Mahmood, A., Rasul, G., Latif, Z., Bashir, F., Sheikh, M. R. and Tasneem, M. A Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.32(1),2013--Pages74--83 Abstract: Isotopic or nuclear techniques are used to find the effect of global warming on glaciers. Nuclear techniques are related to a branch of hydrology known as isotope hydrology in which environmental isotopes are used to solve major problems related to various aspects of water including its origin, age, recharge mechanism and interconnection between different aquifers. The main advantage of isotopic technique is the use of various isotopes as a tracer. Being natural tracer, environmental stable isotopes (oxygen-18, deuterium 2H, etc.) need not be introduced or injected in the system under investigation but they are a part of the hydrological system. Environmental stable isotopes are measured as ratio of most abundant isotopes of a given element to that of less abundant against some reference material. These ratios are measured on gas source mass spectrometers. Tritium, 3H is a short lived radioactive isotope of hydrogen with half-life of 12.43 years and is measured by counting beta decay events in a liquid scintillation counter. Stable isotopes mass spectrometry alongwith tritium dating has been used to determine the source of moisture and the age of ice and melt-water at Passu Glacier. Samples were collected from the stream originating from Passu Glacial Lake which receives melt generated from the seasonal snow cover and glacier melt. Highly depleted values of stable isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen in the samples and highly positive value of deuterium suggests that moisture source of precipitation is from Mediterranean. Tritium values in Passu stream samples from March to August were around 20TU (tritium units) that correspond to the mixing of major part of melt generated from the seasonal snow cover and little from the glacier's melt. In Passu stream samples high tritium concentrations up to 75TU were observed from September to November, the period after the seasonal snow cover has been completely melted. It shows contribution of pure glacier melt in the Passu Glacial Lake during this period. High tritium concentrations in stream flow samples correspond to 1963-64 open weapons testing peak, causing tritium concentration rise. The presence of high tritium concentration in the Passu stream samples is the most visible sign of glacier melt in the area and the impact of climate change on these glaciers. Keywords: Environmental isotopes, Glacier melt, Mass spectrometers, Nuclear techniques, Passu glacier, Tritium dating Citedy By: 0 Monitoring receding of glaciers and in north-eastern Pakistan through geo-informatics techniques. Author: Zamir, U. B. Journal: Academic Research International,Vol.31(4),2012--Pages327--334 Abstract: Pakistan is amongst those countries which are blessed from the wide range of natural features. Pakistan is a land of varied topography, ranging from deep sea to top mountains of the world. Northern area of Pakistan carries the most fascinating mountainous series with snow-clad peaks of varying height. Apart from North and South Pole, Northern Pakistan hosts the greatest masses of glaciated ice in the world. The glaciers are of extreme worth in providing fresh water resources; this important resource is a vital source of water but it has been diminished due to anthropogenic interventions which, as a result, have unbalanced the indigenous eco-system. Monitoring of these glaciers is important to cater the water and power need of a country like Pakistan. By using remote sensing and Geographical Information System (GIS) techniques, this paper is an attempt to address the receding of glaciers and snow cover in the extreme north-eastern districts of Pakistan. Monitoring of melting of glaciers due to climate change in the recent decades has been attempted in this study for Ghanche District. This study is also concerned with observing the spatial change in the snow cover and glaciers of Ghanche District. Keywords: Climate change, GIS,Geo-informatics, Glaciers, Land cover Citedy By: 0 Modeling and simulating the effects of ozone layer depletion on climate change at Pakistan air space. Author: Yousufzai, M. A. K., Ansari, M. R. K. and Iqbal, J. Journal: Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences,Vol.49(2),2012--Pages145--152 Abstract: Ozone is a minor constituent of atmosphere that can shield UV-B radiation right from the solar radiation. Climate refers to the mean behaviour of the weather over some appropriate averaging time. Moreover, the condition of the atmosphere at a particular location and time is its weather that includes winds, clouds, precipitation, temperature and relative humidity. In contrast to weather, the climate of a region is the condition of the atmosphere over many years, as described by long term averages of the same properties that determine weather. The variability in the climatic conditions can enhance the temperature of the region where the ozone is depleted. Due to this increase in the temperature, climatic conditions are changed. We have found some correlational structures for determining the variations in climate on the basis of ozone layer depletion. A model has been developed for evaluating sea surface temperature using stratospheric ozone filter. This filter has been formulated taking into account the ozone layer depletion (OLD) strategy for Pakistan atmospheric regions. For making predictions of fluctuations in the temperatures that in turn create climate change in the region, stochastic analysis is implemented here for observing future conjecture of the incoming radiation. These forecasts are useful for public, private and government organizations. Keywords: Climate change, Ozone, Ozone layer depletion, Simulation, Stratopsheric phenomenon Citedy By: 0 Maize growth and yield in Peshawar under changing climate. Author: Shah, A., Akmal, M. and AndFarhatullah andRaziuddin andAbdul-Rafi, M. Asim Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,Vol.44(6),2012--Pages1933-1938 Abstract: Global climate change is consequence of accumulating greenhouse gases (Carbon) at lower atmosphere which might affects crops growth and yield. Maize is an important summer cereals, grown on considerable area in Pakistan every year. We, therefore, study the delay sowing response with changing climate on maize. Field experiment was conducted at Agronomy Research Farm, Agricultural University Peshawar, Pakistan in a randomized complete block design. Sowing was done from June 8 to July 24, 2010 with ten days intervals. Mazie (cv. Azam) was planted in rows at 0.75 m distance in NS orientations. Crop was raised under the uniform recommended cultural practices. Data regarding days to emergence, tasseling and maturity showed a consecutive decrease when sowing was delayed form June 08 onwards. However, the crop life cycle (i.e. vegetative and reproductive durations) initially remained uniform but expanded for late sowing dates (July). Delay sowing showed an increase in the leaf area index with an abrupt decline for the late sown crop. Nonetheless, plant stand at harvest remained static during the growth for all sowing dates. A stable to moderate reduction was noticed in ear length (cm) when sowings was delayed from Jun 08 onwards. Grain rows cob -1 did not influence by the delay sowing in the season. Moreover, delay sowing did not show any significant (P \textless 0.05) change for the grain number. However, thousand grains weight was initially remained stable but declined (P \textless 0.05) by delay in sowing. Biological yield, dry matter and grains yield (gm-2 ) revealed almost a similar decreasing trend when sowing was delayed. Dry matter to grain yield relationship was linear (r2 = 0.95) and revealed a mean loss of 1.65 g m2 when sowing delayed from June 08 to July 24 in the season. Radiation use efficiency (RUE), the growth function, was also declined by the delay in sowing. We inferred that losses in leaf area indices, ear length and grain weights were basis of the grain yield reduction by changing climate of the growing season which brought a significant disturbance in the vegetative and reproductive phases of the crop life cycle that resulted losses (P \textless 0.05) in grain yield by the late sown crop in the season. Keywords: Climate change, Maize growth, Peshawar, yield, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Review of costs and methods for climate change adaptation. Author: Sarkar, M. S. K., Begum, R. A., Pereira, J. J. and Bin-Jaafar, A. Journal: Journal of Environmental Science and Technology, Volume,Vol.5(6),2012--Pages397--406 Abstract: A number of studies have been estimated adaptation costs of climate change for both developed and developing countries. This study critically reviews adaptation costs of climate change and made a comparison of these estimations and methods. Strategic responses and proper estimates are required to fortify the nations and community resilience to the implications of adverse effects of climate change. Adaptation measures are important to limit the negative impacts of climate change even though with adaptation there will be residual damages/costs. The estimated costs are useful for the basis of discussion and allocation of the amount of investment needed for tackling climate change adaptation. The costing of adaptation should also be robust and methodologically transparent considering residual damages as this has been influential in the debate concerning funding on the issues of climate change. Keywords: Adaptation,Adaptation cost,Climate change,Methods,Review Citedy By: 0 A review of mineral carbonation by enhanced weathering. Author: Saeed, A. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.31(3),2012--Pages195--201 Abstract: Climate change mitigation efforts have so far failed to achieve rapid rates of de-carbonisation. A technical possibility can still be realised. However, the long residence time of CO2 in the atmosphere would continue the warming trend for the foreseeable future even if emissions were immediately cut to zero. Geoengineering methods provide a useful complement to mitigation and adaptation. The emission of CO2 from power stations operating on fossil fuel and other sources can be handled by only three types of storage technologies including: (1) ocean storage, (2) geological storage (geosequestration), and (3) CO2 mineralization or mineral carbonation (geomimicry). This last option provides a permanent solution to storing CO2 safely on a geological time scale. The high cost and elevated energy requirements are preventing this technology from reaching industrial scale. Ultramafic complexes and serpentinite bodies are major sources of magnesium-rich minerals like olivine and serpentine, which can be carbonated by using CO2. The ultramafic rocks of the Great Serpentinite Belt (GSB), northern New South Wales, Australia, have been identified as a high-potential feedstock for mineral carbonation. These deposits indicate variable degrees of carbonation. The source of carbon in ultramafic rocks hosted magnesite veins and deposits are still under debate but agreement appears to be emerging on their near surface formation at low temperature pressure condition. The petrographic and geochemical studies on serpentinite and magnesite have revealed the possibilities of finding the agent/catalyst that could enhance the process of carbonation by using the atmospheric CO2. The list of advantages for Mineral Carbonation over alternative methods for large scale CO2 sequestration is quite long and the fact that Pakistan has substantial amount of serpentine, for example, in Taleri Mohammad Jan village near Hindubagh, opens up the opportunities to carry forward the study on Mineral Carbonation in Pakistan and this could reveal highly effective results. Keywords: Geo-sequestration, Mineral carbonation, Pakistan, Review, Serpentinite, Weathering Citedy By: 0 A unified approach to address water-climate related issues. Author: Rasul, G. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.9(17),2012--Pages85--91 Abstract: Impact of the Climate change will be more pronounced and visible on the water resources as they would send ashock wave to all the socio-economic sectors shattering water, food and energy security. The Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) provides opportunity to involve most of the stakeholders to mitigate and adapt the climate change and variability in a holistic manner at a grass root level. The process incorporates the usable knowledge on past, present and future trends of climate and likely impacts on water resources taking care of risks and vulnerabilities. Risk management is done through low or no-regret investments increasing the resilience of vulnerable communities to the future projected climatic conditions which are gaining confidence due to the continued research. Although it is impossible to halt the changing climate yet the mitigation efforts would secure thefuture of forthcoming generations on the planet earth. At the same time, there is a need to learn how to live with the changing climate by adapting it. Both mitigation and adaptation should go side-by-side reinforcing each otherreducing the risks and vulnerabilities in a participatory manner. Keywords: Climate change, IWRM, Integrated Water Resource Management, Citedy By: 0 Impact of climate changes and correlations on oil fatty acids in sunflower. Author: Onemli, F. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences,Vol.49(4),2012--Pages455--458 Abstract: Sunflower oil is a major important vegetable oil because it is widely used in human nutrition and in many industrial productions depends on fatty acid composition. Field studies were conducted during in two years on the same soil to investigate changes of climate induced oil fatty acid composition of a traditional sunflower, and to obtain correlations among oil fatty acids. Seed oil content and twelve fatty acid percentages of sunflower oil were analyzed. Variations for years were significant for seed oil content and palmitic acid (C16:0), oleic (C18:1), linoleic (C18:2), linolenic (C18:3), miristic (C14:0) and eicosenoic acids (C20:1). Higher temperatures during seed development in 2010 resulted with 68.38 \% increasing in oleic content of the traditional sunflower hybrid. The highest negative correlations (r= -0.99) were noted between oleic and linoleic acids. Keywords: Climate change, Fatty acids, Helianthus annuus, Oil quality, Sunflower Citedy By: 0 Consumptive use of water and genetical assessment of wheat genotypes to defy worrisome prevalence of water stress. Author: Noorka, I. R., El-Bramawy, M. A. S., Tabasum, S. and Saljoqi, A. R. Journal: Sarhad Journal of Agriculture,Vol.28(4),2012--Pages559--564 Abstract: The judicious management of natural resources are the road map, to combat poverty, burgeoning population, disasters and ultimately to attain the world peace. The present study revealed that seven wheat genotypes responded differently to water stress under the changing set of climatic conditions. The water stress played a negative role by decreasing the most of the traits under study, which ultimately showed decline in grain yield. The percent decrease in yield under both normal irrigation and water stress environments depicted that Pak-81 topped the genotypes regarding grain yield and showed a minimum effect of water stress and showed best performance under water stress. Genetical studies were conducted to check heterosis, inbreeding depression, potence ratio, heritability and genetic advance studies for the selected wheat crosses. These genotypes will explore themselves in subsequent generation so that the water stress tolerance genotypes may be produced. The increase in temperature and population will further induce fresh water shortage and law and order situation in the country. The prevailing International tension can be cool down by the introduction of water stress tolerant wheat varieties and their re-evaluation of our research system, which will leads to solve water stess problems. Keywords: Climate, Climate change, Disaster, Grain yield, Heritability, Heterosis, Inbreeding depression, Judicious, Potence ratio, Poverty, Sustainable, Water stress, World peace Citedy By: 0 Shifting herbivory pattern due to climate change: A case study of himalayan balsam from Pakistan. Author: Nasim, G. and Shabbir, A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,Vol.44(1),2012--Pages63--68 Abstract: Pests, diseases and weeds cause significant impact on crops and natural vegetation each year. Climate change is likely to cause a spread of tropical and sub-tropical species into temperate areas and to increase the numbers of many temperate species currently limited by low temperatures at high altitudes. The potential expansion of geographical ranges of pest species will be disruptive to quarantine barriers and is likely to result in increased damage to crops and natural vegetation in previously pest free areas. Elm Leaf Beetle Pyrrhalta luteola (Mueller) is been reported to increase due to 0.3 o C rise in temperature and 3-4 \% decrease in rainfall in the Moist Himalayan Forest of Pakistan. The insect attacks Impatience gladulifera Royle., a plant of medicinal importance. The plant is not only used in a variety of local medicines but is also one of the important constituent of undergrowth natural vegetation in these forests. During the last 10 years the leaf damaged cased by the insect is on a hike and has increased up to 85 \% . Keywords: Climate change, Herbivory, Himalayan balsam, Impatience gladulifera, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Burden of malaria at household level: A baseline review in the advent of climate change. Author: Mia, M. S., Begum, R. A., Er, A., Abidin, R. D. Z. R. Z. and Pereira, J. J. Journal: Journal of Environmental Science and Technology,Vol.5(1),2012--Pages1--15 Abstract: Malaria is the most serious public health problem in tropical and sub-tropical regions of the world. It has emerged one of the top three killers among the vector borne diseases in the world. Changes in climate factors greatly affect seasonal transmission and geographical distribution of malaria which causes great losses to the households in terms of costs of securing treatment as well as loss of output and income in endemic regions. This study aims to identify and review literature related to economic costs of malaria illness at household level. The study also focuses on the burden of the disease in terms of Disability-adjusted Life Years (DALYs) lost. Literatures were identified for review from various sources such as journals, reports, proceedings and other related documents by searching comprehensively both electronic and non-electronic databases. Websites of the organizations known to have undertaken research in this area were also searched to find related documents and reports. Based on the review of literature, it was found that costs of malaria vary by the socio-economic status of households and the poor spend a significantly higher proportion of their income on treatment and preventive measures for the disease. Direct cost of malaria consumed 28-34 \% of annual income of poor households and 1-2 \% of high income households. Studies revealed that indirect costs of malaria accounted for a significant portion of households annual income ranging from 2 to 6 \% . It was found that even under minimal climate change scenario, some African countries may face their inpatient treatment cost of malaria increase more than 20 \% . It can be concluded that illness of malaria imposes greater burden on poor households than the better-off. Minimizing the burden of the disease could help people, especially the poor to get out from the worst economic situation. Therefore, further research is urgently needed to ensure interventions to control the malaria disease more effectively in the advent of climate change. Keywords: Climate change, Household, Illness costs, Malaria, Review Citedy By: 0 Impact of temperature and precipitation on rice productivity in rice-wheat cropping system of Punjab province. Author: Mahmood, N., Ahmad, B., Hassan, S. and Bakhsh, K. Journal: Journal of Animal and Plant sciences,Vol.22(4),2012--Pages993--997 Abstract: Pattern of temperature and precipitation are changing due to global warming, resulting in having impact on crop productivity. The objective of this study was to estimate the impact of climatic variables on rice productivity in the rice-wheat cropping system of the Punjab. Aggregated time series data were used for rice crop. Cobb Douglas type production function was employed with rice yield as dependent variable and climatic factors as independent variables. Results showed that an increase in temperature by 1.5C and 3C would enhance rice yield by 2.09 \% and 4.33 \% , respectively compared to the base year regression estimates. However, an increase in precipitation by 5 \% and 15 \% during September-October could adversely affect rice productivity by 5.71 \% and 15.26 \% , respectively. However, its decrease is positively related with rice yield. Evolving and disseminating rice varieties having adaptation to climate change should be the focus of future research and development. Improved farm management practices, creating awareness among farmers about climate change and strengthening extension department are some measures to be taken for adaptation to climate change in the rice region. Keywords: Basmati rice, Pakistan, Precipitation, Productivity, Punjab, Rainfall, Temperature, Wheat Citedy By: 0 Comparison of temperature sensitive tree-ring chronologies in southern Tibetan plateau and northern Siberia. Author: Li-Xin, L., Ovchinnikov, D. V., Kirdyanov, A. V. and Zhang, Q. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.31(2),2012--Pages152--164 Abstract: Comparison of climate histories over different regions helps in understanding global climate change. Here we compiled temperature sensitive tree-ring chronologies over the southern Tibetan Plateau and Northern Siberia and compared temperature variations over these two regions for the past 350 years. Tree-ring width chronologies of the Eastern Himalayan fir (Abies spectabilis) and alpine junipers (Juniperus recurva and J. squamata) on the southern Tibetan Plateau were found to be sensitive to June-September temperature variations. Tree-ring maximum latewood density time series of Gmelin larch (Larix gmelinii Rupr.) and Siberian larch (L. sibirica) in Northern Siberia were correlated to temperature variations during June-August. Comparison of the two regional chronologies showed that both regions experienced two coldest summer episodes around 1810s-1820s and 1960s-1970s. Wavelet coherence analysis showed that a significant co-variability at around 4-year cycles existed in the periods 1740s-1760s, 1840s-1870s, 1890s-1910s and 1950s-1960s. These results suggested that summer temperature variations over the southern Tibetan Plateau and Northern Siberia had an unstable relationship which was probably a result of different climatic forcing. Yet, the two cold episodes around 1810s-1820s and 1960s-1970s might indicate common driving factors such as volcanic activities and solar forcing in these particular intervals. Keywords: Cold episodes, Comparison, Northern Siberia, Summer temperature, Tibetan Plateau, Tree rings, Volcanic activities Citedy By: 0 Vegetation dynamics in the western Himalayas, diversity indices and climate change. Author: Khan, S. M., Page, S., Ahmad, H., Shaheen, H. and Harper, D. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.31(3),2012--Pages232--243 Abstract: Vegetation provides the first tropic trophic level in mountain ecosystems and hence requires proper documentation and quantification in relation to abiotic environmental variables both at individual and aggregate levels. The complex and dynamic Himalayas with their varying climate and topography exhibit diverse vegetation that provides a range of ecosystem services. The biodiversity of these mountains is also under the influence of diverse human cultures and land uses. The present paper is not only first of its kind but also quite unique because of the use of modern statistical techniques for the quantification of Diversity Indices of plant species and communities. The vegetation was sampled in three categories, i.e., trees, shrubs and herbs, as follows: a height of = 5m were classified in the tree layer, shrubs were all woody species of height 1m and 5m and, finally, the herb layer comprised all herbaceous species less than 1m in height. The presence/absence of all vascular plants was recorded on pre-prepared data sheets (1, 0 data). For the tree layer, the diameter of trees at breast height was measured using diameter tape. Coverage of herbaceous vegetation was visually estimated according to Daubenmire and Braun Blanquet methods. It gives overall abundance of vascular plants on one hand and composition of these species on the other. Data was analysed in Canonical Community Coordination Package (CANOCO) to measure diversity indices of plant communities and habitat types. Results for five plant communities/habitat types indicated that plant biodiversity decreased along the altitude. Shannon Diversity Index values range between 3.3 and 4. N2 index and Index of Sample Variance were also designed. All of these Diversity Indices showed the highest values for the communities/habitats of north facing slopes at middle altitudes. Higher plant diversity at these slopes and altitudes can be associated to the period of snow cover which is longer and a relatively denser tree cover as compared to the southern slopes and hence the soil has high moisture which supports high biodiversity in return. Global warming causes desertification in number of fragile mountain ecosystem around the globe. These findings suggest that species diversity decreases along the measured ecological gradient under the influence of deforestation coupled with global climatic change. Keywords: Biodiversity, Climate change, Diversity Index, Mountain Ecosystem, Vegetation, Western Himalayas Citedy By: 0 Agroclimatic modelling for estimation of wheat production in the Punjab province, Pakistan. Author: Iqbal, M. J., Ali, Z. and Ali, S. S. Journal: Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences,Vol.49(4),2012--Pages241--249 Abstract: Pakistan's economy hinges on agriculture and the most important agricultural commodity of the country is wheat. The province of Punjab has the predominant share in wheat production of the country. As agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to the climate change phenomena, the current global climatic article reports on an attempted agroclimatic model for the estimation of wheat production in Punjab using meteorological parameters. Keywords: Agroclimatic model, Agrometeorological variables, Modelling, Pakistan, Punjab, Wheat, Yield Prediction Citedy By: 0 Global environmental health risks: causes, impacts and mitigations. Author: Hussain, M. Journal: Environ Monitor,Vol.12(9-10),2012--Pages16--20 Abstract: The world at large and the developing countries in particular are entangled by cruel jaws of environmental degradation. Main causes for eco-destruction are exponentially increasing population, improper utilization of natural resources, lack of environmental education, climate change, non availability of health care \& the specialists advice at the required time and natural catastrophes like eruption of volcanoes, earthquakes, hailstorms, tsunamis \& tornadoes. The world communities have continuously been exposed to environmental health risks especially since the dawn of industrial revolution. Multifarious diseases caused by polluted water, air and ground resources, contaminated food, unwanted noise, desertification, deforestation and industries are spreading fast like jungle fire. The health risks are varying according to type of terrain, climatic \& weather conditions, elevations above mean sea level, pets, age, existing health conditions, kind of race, safety and exposure to occupational environments. Populations of Asia \& Africa are facing the environmental health risks more than those of white \& yellow races. At global level 800 million people are suffering from malnutrition. Unwanted noise creates loss of hearing and nervous tension. Smoking and drug addiction have ruined health of the masses especially the youth. Damage to health involves heavy losses to quality and quantum of outputs, economic drain and multiplying hospital admissions \& monetary bills. Extreme events like floods and droughts caused due to climate change result in huge health and financial losses in terms of numerous injuries \& deaths. It is discouraging to note that the developing nations allocate minimum amount of funds for health care facilities. The incidence of diseases is also frequent and wide spread in such countries. Above all these countries do not allocate enough funds for environmental protection so that the diseases like dengue fever may not take the shape of epidemic. It is the most opportune time for individuals, groups, civil society, nations and international communities to undertake mitigation measures against the decaying health issues. There is dire necessity of close collaboration and adoption of joint strategies among the environmentalists, medical professionals, industrialists and public representatives on the mitigation of eco-degradation issues. Environmental Health and Occupational Safety need to be taught in the medical institutions both at graduate and post-graduate levels. Medical practitioners should undertake the Mass Awareness programmes as a matter of routine and advise the patients about the benefits of Cleaner \& Greener Environment, Preventive Medicine and Primary Healthcare. Research centres should be established for undertaking in-depth studies on the specific Environmental Health problems. Keywords: Air pollution, Environmental degradation, Environmental health risks, Global environment, Mitigation, Occupational environments, Water pollution Citedy By: 0 Effects of plant growth regulators on growth and oil quality of canola (Brassica napus L.) under drought stress. Author: Faizanullah, Bano, A. and Nosheen, A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,Vol.44(6),2012--Pages1873--1880 Abstract: Growth regulators have previously been documented to enhance growth and improve oil and protein content of plants. This paper documents the effects of Salicylic acid (SA) and Putrescine (Put) on growth and oil quality of canola (Brassica napus L.) when exposed to drought stress. Two canola cultivars cvv. Rainbow and Dunkeld were grown under natural environmental conditions. Drought stress was imposed for 10d during flowering (90 days after sowing) until the soil moisture content decreased from 22 \% -9 \% . The growth regulators salicylic acid and Putrescine were applied @ 10 -5 mol/L as foliar spray 3 days after drought induction. Drought stress significantly reduced leaf relative water content (LRWC), chl a, chl b, carotenoids and soluble proteins but augmented the leaf proline, seed glucosinolates and oil erucic acid (C22:1) contents. Growth regulators were highly effective in ameliorating the adverse effects of drought stress on both the canola cultivars. The applied growth regulators maintained the water budget of canola plants, augmented the accumulation of osmolyte proline and protected photosynthetic pigments from adverse effects of drought stress. The SA was effective to reduce the drought induced accumulation of glucosinolates and erucic acid in canola oil and both the growth regulators overcame the drought induced decrease in oleic acid (C18:1). It is inferred that SA is economical and environment friendly alternative and can be implicated to improve the plant growth and oil quality of canola in current scenario of drought and climate change. Keywords: Brassica napus, Canola, Drought stress, Growth, Oil quality, Plant growth regulators Citedy By: 0 Effect of sowing dates and picking intervals at boll opening percent, yield and fiber quality of cotton cultivars. Author: Deho, Z. A., Laghari, S., Abro, S. and AndFakhuruddin, S. D. Khanzada Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.31(3),2012--Pages288--293 Abstract: With rising temperature and changing raining patterns, climate change brings forward new threats for cotton cultivation in Sindh. During 2010-11, unexpected rains caused damage to the ripe cotton crop and caused heavy losses in seed cotton, cottonseed germination and lint quality. An experiment was conducted on different sowing dates viz. 15th April, 01st May, 15th May and 01st June and four picking at various boll opening percent. The sowing on May 1st produced the highest boll weight (2.83g) seed index (8.74g), seed cotton yield (3032 kg ha-1), micronaire (4.19) and seed germination percentage (64.86 \% ). In varieties, Sadori produced more boll weight (2.57 g) with seed index (7.46 g), ginning out turn (38.01 \% ), micronaire (4.19) and seed germination (66.35 \% ); whereas picking at various boll opening percent showed higher boll wt. (3.63 g), seed index (8.72), seed cotton yield (3302 kg ha-1), ginning out turn percent (35.79 \% ) in 50 \% boll opening. The higher seed germination percent was recorded in 70 \% boll opening. Keywords: Boll opening, Fiber quality, Gossypium hirsutum, Seed maturity Citedy By: 0 Soil management in mitigating the adverse effects of climate change Author: Bhatti, A. and Khan, M. M. Journal: Soil \& Environment,Vol.31(1),2012--Pages1--10 Abstract: Emission of Green House Gases (GHGs) from various sources into the atmosphere causes rise in air temperature. This addition of GHGs has a great impact on the environment. Among the GHGs, carbon dioxide (CO2) is the major contributor. A variety of options exists for mitigation of GHGs emissions in agriculture. The most prominent options are improved soil management practices viz. integrated plant nutrient management, precision agriculture (variable rate fertilizer technology), use of nitrification inhibitors, crop residue management, moisture restoration and restoration of crop productivity of degraded lands, which increase crop production per unit area, enhancing crop production and withdraw atmospheric CO2 through enhanced photosynthesis. This paper shows that such improved soil management practices can restore the crop productivity of marginal lands and purify the air by withdrawing atmospheric CO2. Keywords: Atmosphere, Climate Change, GHGs, Mitigating, Temperature Citedy By: 0 Identification of glacial flood hazards in Karakoram range using remote sensing technique and risk analysis. Author: Ashraf, A., Roohi, R., Naz, R. and Mustafa, N. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.16(0),2012--Pages71--80 Abstract: Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) are great hazard for the downstream communities in context of changing climatic conditions in the glaciated region of Pakistan. The remote sensing data of Landsat ETM+ was utilized for the identification of glacial lakes susceptible to posing GLOF hazard in Karakoram Range. Overall, 887 glacial lakes are identified in different river-basins of Karakoram Range, out of which 16 lakes are characterized as potentially dangerous in terms of GLOF. The analysis of community \& rsquo;s response to GLOF events of 2008 in the central Karakoram Range indicated gaps in coordination and capacity of the local communities to cope with such natural hazards. A regular monitoring of hot spots and potential GLOF lakes along with capacity- of local communities and institutions in coping future disaster situation is necessary, especially in the context of changing climatic conditions in Himalayan region. Keywords: Climate change, Flood hazards, GLOF hazard, Glacial lakes, Karakoram, Remote sensing, Risk analysis Citedy By: 0 Effect of climate change on apple (Malus domestica var. ambri) production: A case study in Kotli Satian, Rawalpindi, Pakistan. Author: Asghar, A., Ali, S. M. and Yasmin, A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,Vol.44(6),2012--Pages1913--1918 Abstract: Study was undertaken to investigate the long term and short term effect of climate change on apple production in Kotli Sattian area of Rawalpindi District, using Malus domestica var. Ambri L. as an indicator. Climate data for previous 30 years (i.e. 1979-2009) was correlated with net apple production per year. The study also explored other supporting ecological factors like metal content analysis and current soil status (pH, moisture content, organic matter, soil texture) of the orchard \& rsquo;s soil. This investigation revealed that all physico-chemical parameters were supporting production but it declined mainly due to drastic climate change aspects including unusual seasonal variations, elongated summer periods and unusual rainfall periods. In context of questionnaires results, an overwhelming number of farmers (91 \% ) were of the opinion that climate change was the main factor behind decline apple production. The case study served as an effort to bring awareness in the local farmers about the devastating effects of climate changes to help them and improve apple production in Pakistan through enhanced agricultural practices. Keywords: Apple production, Climate change, Kotli Satian, Malus domestica, Pakistan, Rawalpindi Citedy By: 0 Physiological attributes based resilience of wheat to climate change. Author: Fayyazul-Hassan, M. Ahmed, Aslam, M. A. and Aslam, M. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.14(3),2012--Pages407--412 Abstract: Climate change may affect wheat positively or negatively when global warming is likely to increase evapotranspiration (ET) and decrease crop physiological functions. More often droughts are being encountered in Pothwar because of high ET and low precipitation in the form of rainfall. The impact of climate change on physiological attributes [Net photosynthesis(An), stomatal conductance(gs) and transpiration (E)] of spring wheat in Pothwar was studied through field experiments conducted at National Agriculture Research Centre (NARC), Islamabad, Barani Agriculture Research Institute (BARI), Chakwal and at farmer \& rsquo;s field Talagang over two years (2008-2009 \& 2009-2010). The treatments consisted of five planting windows, three genotypes arranged in Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD) factorial replicated four times. The results revealed that changing environment and sowing dates changed the adaptability pattern of wheat crop at three locations, because of change in the temperature and rainfall over the phenological stages of wheat. The reduction in net photosynthetic rate during 2009- 2010 was 21 \% compared to 2008-2009, while among locations 20 \% decrease in An was recorded at Talagang from maximum value at Islamabad. The gs dropped to 50 \% during 2009-2010 due to temperature and moisture stress, while 92 \% reduction in gs was recorded at Talagang compared to highest value. However, transpiration rate dropped to 71 \% during 2009-2010, while among locations crop showed minimum transpiration (79 \% less than maximum) at Talagang. At Chakwal significant decrease in crop physiological parameters declined the grain yield. Talagang being the low rainfall and relatively higher temperature area of Pothwar produced the lowest yield due to drop in physiological functions of crop and reduced LAD and LAI. Findings of the present study provided support for further physiological investigations and potential strategy for minimizing the climate risk especially in rainfed agriculture. Keywords: Climate change, Leaf area duration, Net photosynthesis, Transpiration, Wheat Yield, Pothwar Citedy By: 0 Innovative solutions to reduce threats affecting biodiversity conservation. Author: Al-Eisawi, D. M. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,Vol.44(SI),2012--Pages157--163 Abstract: Biodiversity threats are becoming much more adverse than ever been. Accordingly, the conservation tasks are becoming more difficult to achieve especially, with the worse situation of global warming and climate change. Various methods can be summarized under the major themes of conservation known as In-Situ and Ex-Situ conservation. However, everyday there are certain creative methods, that are considered very creative, but most are still listed as subdivisions of the classical methods. In this paper, some classical conservation methods are reviewed and lessons learned from nature will be introduced which might have an impact on our understanding of plant conservation. The examples of conservation will be dealing mostly with plants growing in the desert and dry ecosystem. Plants species growing under little amounts of rainfall reaching 70 mm / year, as well as shifting of the flowering behavior of other species are used as examples of innovation solutions for conservation. Keywords: Biodiversity, Conservation solutions, Threats Citedy By: 0 Climate change scenario: From where to start Author: Ahmed, M. and Shaukat, S. S. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.31(3),2012--Pages 227--231 Abstract: The present paper briefly reviews various natural reasons responsible for climatic change in geological time. It also describes anthropogenic factors resulting in global warming since last two centuries. Evidences of recent climatic changes indicate some challenges which may be encountered by people of Pakistan. Many papers suggested that Dendrochronology (Tree-ring science) could be a solution. It may not only describe the climatic variation of recent past (500 to 1000 years) but future trends of climate may also be predicted using this applied, rapidly growing and multidisciplinary science. It is also suggested that reconstruction of past climatic history should be the first step to prepare ourselves in a climatic change scenario. Successful application of tree-ring to solve hydrological problems in Pakistan has also been mentioned. Keywords: Climatic change, Dendrochronology, Past climatic variations, Prediction, Proxy record, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Remote sensing and GIS application in wetland change analysis: Case study of Kallar Kahar. Author: Ahmad, S. S. and Erum, S. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.31(3),2012--Pages251--259 Abstract: Wetlands are the one of the naturally occurring habitat. They provide invaluable biodiversity resources, aids in water quality improvement, support ground water recharge, help in moderating climate change and supply flood control but they are deteriorated greatly due to economic development and population growth. In the present analysis, the object-based approach of ENVI' is presented to derive the change detection inventory information for Kallar Kahar Wetland using Quick bird imagery and Corona imagery. According to the results, agricultural and shrub area has reduced by 43 \% and 49 \% respectively whereas there has been an increase in the water-body, uncultivated/soiled area, orchard and built-up area by 40 \% , 53 \% , 79 \% and 38 \% , respectively. In order to analyse the change detection of Wetlands using very high resolution satellite images, the outcome of the analyses is presented which can help in decision making for the purpose of land development and further assess the implications of the observed changes in the area for making appropriate recommendations. Keywords: GIS, Kallar Kahar Lake, Land cover changes, Land use, Object-based analysis, Pakistan, Remote sensing, Satellite images, Wetland Citedy By: 0 Decline of conifer forest cover in Pakistan: A GIS approach . Author: Ahmad, S. S., Abbasi, Q., Jabeen, R. and Shah, M. T. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,Vol.44(2),2012--Pages511--514 Abstract: Deforestation is one of the obstinate environmental problems globally. Pakistan, being a developing nation also encompasses crisis of depletion of forest reserves. The rising climate change consequences remain the primary culprit behind this phenomenon. The present study intends to focus attention on one of the threatened vegetation types, the Conifer forests and their consequent reduction in area during the last two decades. GIS techniques have been employed to analyze the change detection in various regions and provinces of Pakistan. The results of current study indicated that Conifer forests have been declining at the rate of 1.27 \% per annum since 1992, showing negative trends due to various causes associated with climate change i.e. increase in temperature and decrease in rainfall. So, the need for the conservation of these forests should be the basic task to accomplish order to avoid their vulnerability against various environmental and socio economic disturbances. Keywords: Biodiversity loss, Conifer forest, Deforestation, Environmental issues, GIS, Pakistan, forest cover Citedy By: 0 Responses of cultivated plants and some preventive measures against climate change Author: Ulukan, H. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.13(2),2011--Pages 292--296 Abstract: World previously underwent four major disasters and another disaster is expected due to rapidly occurring climate change. The majority of rays of light, which reach the ground from the sun in (6-8 min) cause greenhouse effect and increase the earth temperature since they are not reflected back. With climate change, polar ice-caps melt and flow into the ocean, the level of the sea raises, fresh water reserves are decreasing (due to the increase of salt water) and ecosystem components, which are essential for life and biological diversity are eroding. The organisms are forced to migrate to regions, which are lowly affected by climate changing. The resulting species and habitat shifts result in some organisms (Tarantula spp., Castanea spp., Malus floribunda, etc.), whose natural habitat is humid regions, such as tropical and coastal regions, can be encountered in temperate and inland regions (e.g., Turkey). Many great and famous lakes and wetlands disappeared (e.g., Aral, Salda, Meke Lakes) and snow and ice on many mountains has melted (e.g., Mount of Kilimanjaro, Ilgaz Mountains, etc.) in the world. Similarly, the effects of climate change on cultivated plants (C3, C4, CAM) are dramatic and this issue has been examined physiologically and agronomical. It is suggested that concerned institutions should immediately develop necessary plans, programs and collaborative mechanisms to combat climate change effects. Keywords: Agro-morphologic traits, Climate change, Cultivated plants, Preventive measurements Citedy By: 0 Climate change, biodiversity Pakistan Scenario Author: Qureshi, N. A. and Ali, Z. Journal: Journal of Animal and Plant sciences,Vol.21(25),2011--Pages358--363 Abstract: Climate is the major factor which controls the global pattern of vegetative structure, productivity and species composition of plant and animal. Its implications for ecosystems have appalling consequences related economic and social systems. Many plants can reproduce and grow within specific range of temperature and specific amounts of precipitation. Same is the case with the animals and are also dependent on the persistent of their food species. Therefore, climate change can affect the ecosystems and the biodiversity within them in many ways. The changes that have been observed in the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in the recent decades have been discussed include few examples of distribution of marine turtles, salt lake wetlands complex and the Indus River ecosystem. Although, biodiversity under threatened due to anthropogenic stresses along with the climate change but the apt management of biodiversity can reduce the blow of climate change. Keywords: Anthropogenic climate change, Community structure, Distribution, Indus River, Marine turtles, Pakistan, Uchalli Wetlands Complex Citedy By: 0 A review on biomass-coal co-combustion: Current state of knowledge Author: Munir, S. Journal: Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences,Vol.47(4),2011--Pages265--287 Abstract: The concept of "Energy from biomass" gained attention in the last decade in the context of clean electricity generation. It is still a developing field because of the unavailability of standard engineering practices in this area. The variations in the chemical composition and physical properties of biomasses have made this task lengthier. There are several parametric studies available in the literature on the co-firing of biomass with coal. The information on agricultural residue co-firing in conjunction with air and fuel staging is scarce. The idea of energy crops for co-combustion to get green energy needs review due to present food shortage crises in the world. Therefore, there is utmost need to explore the energy potential and environmental benefits associated with the agricultural wastes-coal co-firing. The present paper presents a review of the previous work and suggests a strategy for Pakistan to solve energy crises by utilizing its indigenous resources of coal and agricultural waste. Keywords: Bagasse,Biomass,C limate change, Energy, Renewable Citedy By: 0 Ecosystem sustainability, climate change, and rural communities Author: Meadows, P. S. Journal: Journal of Animal and Plant sciences,Vol.21(25),2011--Pages317--332 Abstract: Ecosystem sustainability and rural community uplift are essential to address in terms of the progressive pollution of global ecosystems, rapid urbanisation, and the increasingly severe predictions of climate change. The sustainability of ecosystems in the coastal zone and its wildlife is therefore vital. This review addresses these issues by considering current views on climate change and the United Nations Millennium Development Goals. Models show how international, national and local organisations impact on human communities and on ecosystems and wildlife, and how community sustainability is linked with ecosystem sustainability. Research is described on ecosystem sustainability and biodiversity in the coastal zone. This focuses on marine sedimentary ecosystems in the intertidal and sub littoral zone. Colonisation of sediment by living organisms changes the sedimentary ecosystem. Interactions between organisms living in sediment and the physical and chemical properties of sediment are also important. Sediment microorganisms reduce sediment permeability. This reduces in faunal biodiversity. Beds of the cord grass Spartina at the edges of estuaries make water flow turbulent. This alters potential flood risks and riverbank or estuarine erosion. Changes in temperate and tropical aquatic ecosystems have a central role in determining the abundance and sustainability of larger organisms. These organisms (shellfish, finfish, and birds) are used directly by rural communities, and are also important for ecotourism. Ecosystem sustainability is therefore central to coastal zone rural communities and their economies. The education and awareness building of the coastal communities in these issues is therefore vital. Keywords: Climate change, Ecosystem sustainability, Rural communities Citedy By: 0 Relationship of coleoptile length and plant height in winter wheat accessions Author: Liatukas and Ruzgas, V. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,Vol.43(3),2011--Pages1535--1540 Abstract: Climate change prognoses suggest more unpredictable and less favourable conditions for cereal crop establishment in Europe. The development of varieties possessing long coleoptiles could improve winter wheat environmental adaptability. A total of 564 winter wheat control varieties and breeding lines developed basically using European winter wheat germplasm were screened for coleoptile length and plant height during 2004-2009. The filter paper towel method showed significant differences among the accessions. Most of the accessions (50.8 \% ) possessed a coleoptile length ranging between 3.00 and 6.00 cm. The correlation between coleoptile length and plant height was weak in 2005 and 2006 (respectively, r=0.485* \& 0.468*, p \& le;0.01), but medium (respectively, r=0.578* - 0.625*) in 2004, 2007-2009. Accessions screening extent could be reduced selecting accessions with acceptable plant height (85-100 cm). Accessions percentage that fitted to this group ranged from 23.4 \% in 2006 to 67.9 \% in 2009 and average of 6 years was 40.3 \% . Among the 564 tested accessions, 36 breeding lines or 6.4 \% possessed coleoptiles longer than 8 cm but none of them exceeded 10 cm. Plant heights of these accessions ranged from 94 to 118 cm. The 13 accessions possessed acceptable plant height. The lines possessing in pedigree varieties Flair and Pegassos (each in 7 lines) were the most frequent. This data shows that the new winter wheat breeding lines possessing long coleoptiles in combination with acceptable plant height can be developed using European winter wheat varieties. Keywords: Coleoptile, Plant height, Wheat, Winter Citedy By: 0 Vulnerability to climate change: adaptation strategies and layers of resilience in semi arid zones of Pakistan Author: Khan, M. A., Hussain, A., Mehmood, I. and Hassan, S. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Research,Vol.24(1-4),2011--Pages65--74 Abstract: This study aims to identify the effects of climate change on the socioeconomic characteristic and livelihoods of farmers in semi arid zones of Punjab and Khyber Pukhtunkhwa provinces of Pakistan. Data for the study has been taken from various issues of Crop Area Production (by districts) MINFA (Economic Wing), district agricultural departments and meteorological department, Islamabad. Primary data for the study was collected in 2010 by conducting farm level surveys in Kohat and Attock districts. Clusters of six villages were selected from each district for field surveys. Six community representatives and 36 farmers were interviewed by using a set of well-designed questionnaires from each site. Results showed that over last three decades, number of small and tenant farmers increased in the semi-arid zones of Pakistan due to environmental harshness in general and law of inheritance in particular. Due to increase in mean annual temperatures and irregular rain patterns, area under major crops at Kohat and productivity of major crop at Attock decreased. Bivariate correlations between mean seasonal rainfall, area and production of major crops were moderately positive and statistically significant (except for wheat crop at Attock). This means that an increase in rainfall contribute positively towards area under major crops and their production and vice-versa. Farmers perceived a major change in climate at Kohat and a minor change at Attock over time. They reported unsustainability in production practices at Kohat and water management practices at both sites. Main strategies adopted by the farmers to mitigate the effects of climate change were occasional sale of livestock, reduction in consumption expenditures, and migration to nearby cities for non-farm employment. Keywords: Bivariate Correlation, Climate Change, Farmers, Livelihood, Pakistan, Socioeconomics, Vulnerability Citedy By: 0 Bivariate Correlation, Climate Change, Farmers, Livelihood, Pakistan, Socioeconomics, Vulnerability Author: Kazi, A. Q. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.15(2),2011--Pages1--8 Abstract: As a result of limited fossil-fuel resources, slow adoption and propagation of renewable energy technologies, spiraling prices of petroleum products and worsening environmental conditions, due to climate change, every country is faced with the need to define new directions with respect to energy consumption, conservation, and energy-options. These aspects are discussed in some detail in this article, which proposes that a multi-pronged strategy, encompassing (i) a change in overall life style, (ii) energy-efficient construction, distribution and utilization, (iii) effective environment-management and energy-discipline, be adopted to control and conserve energy in the increasing energy-demand scenario. Keywords: Climate change, Energy conservation, Fossil fuel, Renewable energy Citedy By: 0 Aflatoxin contamination in chilies from Punjab Pakistan with reference to climate change Author: Iqbal, S. Z., Bhatti, I. A., Asi, M. R., Bhatti, H. N. and Sheikh, M. A. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.13(2),2011--Pages261--265 Abstract: High prevalence of liver cancer is caused by aflatoxins in developing countries. The consumption of AFs contaminated foodstuff by humans or animals results in several carcinogenic diseases including liver cancer. Also, there is a need to know base line levels of aflatoxin in crops to know when abnormal concentrations may occur, for example, from climate change. Total aflatoxins were determined in 156 chili samples from Pakistan by reverse phase HPLC with florescence detection in work undertaken in that country. The limits of detection and quantification for aflatoxin B1 and aflatoxin G1 were 0.05 and 0.5 \& micro;g kg-1, while for aflatoxin G2 and aflatoxin B2 they were 0.1 and 0.60 \& micro;g kg-1. Total aflatoxins were determined in whole (n = 78) and ground (n = 78) chilies and the concentration were high in many cases. Aflatoxins were detected in 26 (33 \% ) of whole chilies: concentration range was from 0.00 to 81.5 \& micro;g kg-1. The equivalent values for ground chilies were 31 (40 \% ) and 0.00 to 84.8 \& micro;g kg-1. The percentage of samples greater than the European Union statutory limit for AFB1 and total aflatoxins were 26 and 19 \% , respectively. Keywords: Aflatoxins,Chilies,Climate change,Liver cancer Citedy By: 0 Climate-change aspersions on food security of Pakistan. Author: Iqbal, M. M., Goheer, M. A. and Khan, A. M. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.15(1),2011--Pages15--23 Abstract: The economy of Pakistan is agrarian. The production system is predominantly irrigated that uses 90 \% of the available river-water and provides over 80 \% of agricultural produce. The productive resources of land and water, which are the base for food production, are limited, rather dwindling due, inter alia, to the changing climate. The climate change is exerting pressure on these resources, both directly (e.g. through increased glacier-melt, increased evapo -ranspiration, increased land-degradation, etc) and indirectly (e.g. via enhancing soil processes, such as, denitrification leading to emission of greenhouse gases, and unavailability of plant-nutrients, increasing crop-water requirements, etc). Not only this, but the frequency and intensity of extreme climate events of floods, drought, cyclones, etc., is on the increase with serious consequences for the standing crops apart from immeasurable damage to life and property. These changes are expected to have significant impacts on food security of the country. Global assessment (projections) of the impact of climate change on agriculture suggests-losses in crop yields, reduction of growing-season length, increased water requirements of crops and decreased irrigation water supplies as a result of warmer temperatures. This paper presents results of some studies carried out at GCISC with the help of DSSAT-based crop-simulation models (CERES-Wheat and CERES-Rice) on impacts of climate change on the productivity of two major food crops, wheat and rice, of Pakistan. The paper also discusses food-security prospects of Pakistan towards the end of this century in the light of the abovementioned analyses. Keywords: Cyclones, DSSAT, Economy, Evapo-transpiration, Climate-change, food security, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Environmental challenges and opportunities for the developing countries Author: Hasibullah Journal: Science Vision,Vol.15(1),2011--Pages1--13 Abstract: Environmental degradation and issues of climate change have attracted world \& rsquo;s attention during the past several decades. Both rich and poor nations are prone to the adverse socio-economic consequences of environmental deterioration and Global Warming. But the poor and developing countries suffer much more than the developed ones. Due to economic compulsions and technological constraints, a large number of developing countries is unable to take firm policy-decisions for quick actions to address the climate and environment-related problems. Most of the challenges in this regard are specific to the developing countries. This article identifies some of these challenges, which pertain to conceptual uncertainties, energy scarcities, disappointment with the multilateral initiatives, weak international cooperation and lack of global direction for the future action. However, some opportunities have also been envisaged despite these challenges. As a major opportunity, the case of nuclear power has been highlighted, which has the potential to address the climate-related problems with appreciable advantage over other carbon emitting energy sources. The role of renewable energy technologies in mitigating carbon dioxide emissions is also important, although these technologies still require further technical advancement and commercial acceptability. International mechanisms to manage nuclear power on global level have good prospects in the future. Policy perceptions for a consensual, legally binding and sustainable post Kyoto Protocol agreement have also been treated with reference to the requirements of the developing countries. The conclusions reemphasize the need of collective global action against the climate change, on urgent basis, and more proactivity on the part of developing countries to draw benefits from the post-Copenhagen negotiations. Developed countries need to enhance cooperation with the developing countries in capacity-building through transfer of technology and financial assistance. Keywords: Climate, Environmental deterioration, Global Warming, Post-Copenhagen Citedy By: 0 Impact of global warming on monsoon variability in Pakistan Author: Ghaffar, A. and Javid, M. Journal: Journal of Animal and Plant Sciences,Vol.21(1),2011--Pages108--111 Abstract: This study is based on fifty years (1951-2000) data of temperature and rainfall from six different stations of Pakistan. The selection of the stations is based on hilly areas that are totally dependant on rains. This study is divided into three parts Pre-Monsoon (April- May), Summer Monsoon (June- August) and Post Monsoon (September- October). Variation trends are analyzed based on the processed data that temperature is increasing during Pre and Post Monsoon while rainfall has over all decreasing trend during the study period. Pakistan needs better prediction of Monsoon, accurate calculation of water storage and losses, particularly for the agriculture use. Keywords: Climate change, Global warming, Monsoon variability, Pakistan, Prediction, Rainfall, Temperature Citedy By: 0 Satellite-Based snowcover distribution and associated snowmelt runoff modeling in Swat River Basin of Pakistan Author: Dahri, Z. H., Ahmad, B., Leach, J. H. and Ahmad, S. Journal: Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences,Vol.48(1),2011--Pages19--32 Abstract: The snowcover and glaciers of Hindu Kush-Himalayan (HKH) region are one of the largest repositories of inland cryosphere outside Polar Regions and obviously the lifeline for the people of sub-continent. However, reliable estimates of the snow area extent and snowmelt runoff have been lacking in this largely inaccessible and data sparse region. This is particularly important in view of the climate change impacts on hydrological resources of the region. Present study utilized GIS, RS and hydrological modeling techniques to estimate spatial and temporal distribution of snowcover; quantified snowmelt and rainfall runoff components; and developed prediction models for snowmelt and river discharges. The results revealed that Swat River Basin of Pakistan is predominantly snowfed, as the annual snowmelt runoff contribution to the total runoff may range 65-75%. A significant effect of snowcover variation was observed on river discharge and snowmelt runoff. Snowcover and associated snowmelt runoff remain highly variable throughout the calendar year. Snowfall usually starts abruptly in September and October months but the following four main winter months (i.e.,November-February) generally bring in most of the snowfall. Snowcover increases from less than 2% of the Basin area in August, only at higher altitudes, to about 64% by the end of January or early February. Snowmelt generally continues throughout the year but contribution of winter snowmelt runoff is generally very low. Unlike snowfall, snowmelt runoff usually progresses gradually and smoothly and is more predictable. The summer snowmelt normally gets momentum in March and increases from around 30-60 m3/sec to 400-760 m3/sec in late June or early July. Thereafter, it declines gradually, reducing to 30-50 m3/sec in December. The December-February runoff normally remains the same. Keywords: GIS, Hydrological modeling, RS,Runoff, Snowcover, Snowmelt Citedy By: 0 Impact of climate change on wheat productivity in mixed cropping system of Punjab Author: Ashfaq, M., Zulfiqar, F., Sarwar, I., Abdul-Quddus, M. and Baig, I. A. Journal: Soil & Environment,Vol.30(2),2011--Pages110--114 Abstract: The climate change has important and measurable effects in Pakistan. The objective of this paper was to measure these effects on wheat productivity in mixed zone of Punjab province. A time series data from 1980-81 to 2008-09 was used to achieve the desired objective. The impact of climate change on wheat productivity was analyzed along with some economic incentives. The results of the analysis have shown that one degree centigrade increase in mean minimum temperature at sowing stage will increase wheat productivity by 146.57 kg ha-1. At vegetation stage the increase in mean maximum temperature will reduce productivity, although non significant, by speeding up vegetative growth and reducing grain development period. At maturity stage, the productivity gain will be 136.63 kg ha-1 as result of one degree centigrade increase in mean maximum temperature. The adequate amount of rainfall increases wheat productivity by 275.77 kg ha-1. The productivity response to economic variables was relatively flat and constant, 94.43 kg ha-1. It was thus concluded that the climate change is the major determinant of wheat productivity at each stage of wheat growth. Keywords: Faisalabad, OLS, Ordinary Least Square, Rainfall, Temperature, wheat productivity, climate change, Punjab Citedy By: 0 Flood Inundation Modeling for Malir Watershed of Karachi Considering Future Mean Sea Level Rise Author: Habib-ur-Rehman, H. A. Bakhsh, Shakir, A. S. and Khan, N. M. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.9(0),2011--Pages34--47 Abstract: Karachi is the one of the largest coastal city of Asia \& impacts of sea water level rise are worth studying for betterment of the inhabitants. It is the largest metropolitan of Pakistan with population over 16 million that is expected to reach 27 million by the year 2020. Heavy rainfalls of a high intensity are experienced on occasions with the average annual rainfall varying from 125-250 mm. The urban population along the coast line varies from 10 to more than 7000 persons/km2 which is vulnerable to tropical cyclones as well as resulting floods. There is no fixed cycle for the occurrence of these occasional heavy down-pours. They are dependent upon the local atmospheric disturbances in the sea which occurs from time to time. Rain-storms, cyclones, floods and tidal bores are all natural phenomenon and their recurrence cannot be ruled out. Such natural hazards are responsible for the loss of millions of lives and damages to the properties. Man must therefore, learn to plan and build safely to counteract the devastation which can be caused by these forces of nature. This paper describes the simulation for the extent and depth of flooding in some portion of the Karachi city lying in the catchment area of Malir River due to rainfall event of the year 2007, change in the mean sea level at Karachi coast for the years 2025, 2050, 2075 \& 2100 in accordance with the report of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and due to rise of 6m in mean sea level and its backward flow through the estuary of Malir River. A distributed physically based hydrological model named Keywords: Climate Change,Flood Inundation Depths, Flood Modeling, IISDHM,Mean Sea Level Rise, River Malir Citedy By: 0 Climate Change Impact on River Flows in Chitral Watershed Author: Habib-ur-Rehman, A. S. Shakir and Ehsan, S. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.7(0),2011--Pages12--23 Abstract: The impact of climate change has always been very important for water resources in the world. In countries like Pakistan where different weather conditions exist, the effects of climate change can be more crucial. Generally, the climate changes are considered in terms of global warming i.e. increase in the average temperature of earth \& rsquo;s near surface air. The global warming can have a strong impact on river flows in Pakistan. This may be due to the melting of snow and glaciers at a higher rate and changes in precipitation patterns. Glaciers in Pakistan cover about 13,680 km 2 which is 13 \% of the mountainous regions of the Upper Indus Basin. Glacier and Snowmelt water from these glaciers contributes significantly to the river flows in Pakistan. Due to climate change, the changes in temperature and the amount of precipitation could have diversified effects on river flows of arid and semi-arid regions of Pakistan. This paper reviews the existing research studies on climate change impact on water resources of Pakistan. The past trend of river flows in Pakistan has been discussed with respect to the available data. Further, different projections about future climate changes in terms of glacier melting \& changes in temperature and precipitation have also been taken into consideration in order to qualitatively assess the future trend of river flows in Pakistan. As a case study, the flows were generated for the Chitral watershed using UBC Watershed Model. Model was calibrated for the year 2002, which is an average flow year. Model results show good agreement between simulated and observed flows. UBC watershed model was applied to a climate change scenario of 1 o C increase in temperature and 15 \% decrease in glaciated area. Results of the study reveal that the flows were decreased by about 4.2 \% . Keywords: Chitral river, Global warming, Indus river basin, River flows, UBC Watershed Model Citedy By: 0 Downscaling ability of PRECIS over Snow-Covered areas of Pakistan Author: Ghulam-Rasul, W. Iqbal Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.7(14),2011--Pages45--51 Abstract: The regional climate models are being used to investigate the future projections of climate change and their impacts in developing and developed countries of the world in the recent era. The present study is carried out to study the downscaling ability of a regional climate model named PRECIS (Providing Regional Climates for Impacts Studies) of Hadley Centre, Meteorological Office, U. K in mountainous regions ofPakistan. The model is applied to the Snow-covered areas of Pakistan with two different horizontal resolutions of 25 km and 50 km to study its ability to simulate the climate of regions of complex topography. The simulations of the model are compared with the observed meteorological data and CRU (Climate Research Unit) gridded data set. The results show that both simulations of PRECIS overestimate mean temperature for the Snow-covered areas of Pakistan. However, the difference between the model \& rsquo;s simulated temperature and the observed temperature is less for the 25 km simulation as compared to that of 50 km simulation. The comparison of the model used altitudes and actual altitudes shows that the main factor for these large biases is the topography of the model. The bias in the model may be decreased by updating the topography of the model which will enhance the confidence in the future predications provided by the model. Keywords: Altitude, Baseline, Mean temperature, PRECIS ,Pakistan, RCM, Snow Citedy By: 0 Impact of climate change on agriculture: empirical evidence from arid region Author: Abdul-Saboor, U. Shakoor, Ali, I. and Mohsin, A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences,Vol.48(4),2011--Pages327--333 Abstract: Climate change has become a great challenge for the agrarian economy of Pakistan. A serious threat is to the crop sector which is vulnerable to change in temperature and rainfall. This study traced the impact of climate change on the agriculture of arid region by employing a cross sectional data collected through a structured questionnaire in Rawalpindi division in addition to using time series data of climatic variables obtained from metrological stations. A Ricardian approach was operated to test the relationships between Net Farm Revenue (NFR) and climate across the arid region. Wheat crop was the core of the subject matter. It was found that temperature increase has significant negative impact on agriculture production. Moreover, an increase in revenue was visualized with the increase in rainfall. The overall extent of negative impact of temperature is greater than the positive effect of rainfall in the region. It was revealed that one percent increase in temperature would lead to loss of Rs. 4180 to the net revenue per annum. Dissemination of new farming techniques including new irrigation methods, new methods of crop farming and adapted cropping pattern would be the appropriate derivatives of 1paradigm shift required in the agriculture sector of arid region. Keywords: Arid region, Climate change, Wheat crop Citedy By: 0 Physicochemical assessment of surface and groundwater quality of the greater Chittagong region of Bangladesh Author: Ahmed, M. J., Haque, M. R., Ahsan, A., Siraj, S., Bhuiyan, M. H. R., Bhattacharjee, S. C. and Islam, S. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Analytical \& Environmental Chemistry,Vol.11(2),2011--Pages1--11 Abstract: The study was carried out to assess surface and groundwater quality of the greater Chittagong (Chittagong and Cox.s Bazar districts) and Chittagong Hill Tracts (Rangamati, Khagrachhari and Bandarban districts) of Bangladesh. To study the various physicochemical and microbiological parameters, surface water samples from the Karnafuli, Halda, Sangu, Matamuhuri, Bakkhali, Naf, Kasalong, Chingri and Mayani Rivers, Kaptai Lake and groundwater samples from almost every Upazilas, smaller administrative unit of Bangladesh, were collected and analyzed. The statistical methods of sampling were used for collecting samples. Samples were preserved using suitable preservation methods. Water samples from the freshwater resources were collected from different points and tide conditions and at different seasons for continuous monitoring during the hydrological years 2008-2009. The collected samples were analyzed for the following parameters: pH, electrical conductivity (EC), total dissolved solids (TDS), total suspended solids (TSS), total solids (TS), dissolved oxygen (DO), transparency, acidity, dissolved carbon dioxide, total alkalinity, total hardness, chloride, ammonia-N, hydrogen sulfide, sulphate-S, o-phosphate-P, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), nitrate-N, nitrite-N, total nitrite and nitrate-N, arsenic, iron, manganese, copper, nickel, chromium, cadmium, lead, calcium, magnesium, sodium and potassium using the procedure outlined in the standard methods. Average values of maximum physicochemical and microbiological parameters studied for the Karnafuli River were found higher than the World Health Organization (WHO) guideline. The maximum water quality parameters of Kaptai Lake and other Rivers of Chittagong region were existed within the permissible limits of WHO guideline. The data showed the water quality slightly differs in pre-monsoon and post-monsoon than monsoon season. The concentration of different constituents of most of the groundwater samples were within the permissible limits of BSTI drinking water quality guideline except As, Fe, and Mn. Results of water quality assessment identified the problem areas in respect of arsenic. The results also provided data to understand and quantify the threat of the impact of climate change on freshwater resources of this region. The results also provided data for water quality of surface and groundwater resources of Chittagong region to match national and international standards for drinking, agricultural, industrial and livestock requirements. Keywords: Freshwater resources, Greater Chittagong region, Physicochemical assessment Citedy By: 0 Deforestation analysis of riverine forest of sindh using remote sensing techniques Author: Abbasi, H. U., Baloch, M. A. and Memon, A. G. Journal: Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology,Vol.30(3),2011--Pages477--482 Abstract: During recent decades the large scale deterioration of forests and natural resources is an eye opener. The degradation of forests and other natural resources has affected the ecology, environment, health and economy. The ecological problems with living organisms such as animals and plants and environmental problems such as increase in temperature and carbon dioxide, these factors have contributed to change in regional climate, health problems such as skin, eye diseases and sunstroke and economic problems such as loss of income to rural population and resources which depend on forests such as livestock. Therefore, it was necessary to carry out land cover/use research focusing on the monitoring and management of the present and past state of forests cover and other related objects using RS (Remote Sensing) technologies. The RS is a way of mapping and monitoring the changes taking place in forests cover and other objects on a continuing basis. Sukkur and Shikarpur riverine forests are vanishing quickly due to the construction of barrages /dams on upper streams to produce hydroelectricity and irrigation installations which reduce the discharge of fresh water into the downstream Indus basin. Moreover, anthropogenic activities, livestock population, increased grazing, load and illegal tree cutting have contributed to this. The riverine forests are turning into barren land and most of the land is used for agriculture. These uncontrolled changes contribute to climate change and global warming. These changes are difficult to monitor and control without using RS technology. Assessment of deforestation of the Sukkur and Shikarpur to find temporal changes in the forests cover from April, 1979 to April, 2009 is presented in this paper. The integrated classes such as water body, grass/agriculture land, dry/barren land and forest cover maps show the temporal changes taking place in the forests cover for the last 30 years period. RS has been employed in the present study to assess deforestation. The results show significant changes in sub-tropical forests cover; the overall forests cover in April, 1979 was 22.67 \% , April, 1992 17.38 \% , April, 1998 12.28 \% , April, 2000 6.15 \% , April, 2006 7.51 \% , and April, 2009 5.97 \% . The overall change observed in forest area is 25.07 \% . Keywords: Analysis deforestation, Land use cover remote sensing, Landsat, Maximum likelihood algorithm, Riverine Forest Sindh, Supervised classification method, Sukkur, Shikarpur Citedy By: 0 Projections of crop water requirement in Pakistan under global warming. Author: Naheed, G. and Rasul, G. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.7(13),2010--Pages45--51 Abstract: Climate change has now been globally recognized as a challenging threat to the humanity. The anthropogenic activities are also among the driving forces besides others. The consequent impacts on various sectors, especially the agriculture, are more pronounced. Due to fact that the weather/climate has no political boundaries the developed industrial nations are polluting their regional environment and ecology. In this way the under developed and poor nations, like Pakistan, have to suffer severely. Besides this the availability and reservation of water resources are also a giant challenge in future, on international as well on regional level. Also due to political and strategic relationship to the neighboring countries, water availability would be a big problem for the country in near future. Future projections for climate are showing increasing trend in surface temperatures, which will ultimately augment some agrometeorological elements like reference crop evapotranspiration (ETo) etc. The current study is carried out to analyse the subsequent effects of increasing temperatures on ETo and on the agriculture water demand in the country. In the light of climate projections from various authentic sources like IPCC, increasing trends of 1-3C have been studied which is likely in next 50 years. It has been concluded that the southern half of Pakistan may be the least affected areas in the time to come. However, in northern half, a sharp increase in water demand as compared to the present will appear leading to the enhanced risk of crop failure in rain fed areas where supplementary irrigation is not available. This study will help in crop monitoring and in the assessment that how much water available in future for crops; which type of crops would suit the climate, Better management and building of new water reservoirs may help to cope the situation for an improved agriculture growth. Keywords: Agrometeorology, Anthropogenic activities, Climate change, Evapotranspiration, Global warming, Pakistan, Temperature, Water requirement Citedy By: 0 New Pakisaurus (Pakisauridae, Titanosauria, Ssauropoda) remains, and Cretaceous Tertiary (K-T) boundary from Pakistan. Author: Malkani, M. S. Journal: Sindh University Research Journal,Vol.42(1),2010--Pages39--64 Abstract: Pakisaurus remains has been found from the latest Cretaceous Vitakri Formation (previous upper member of Pab Formation) in Kinwa, Bor, Top Kinwa, Shalghara, Sangiali, Alam Kali Kakor (north), Zubra, Darwaza, Grut, Dolvahi east, and some other localities of Sulaiman Basin, Pakistan. These fossils provide head to tail and back to foot morphology. Multipurpose tail special with trispinous distalmost caudal centrum of Pakisaurus of Pakisauridae and some or all genera of Pakisauridae and Balochisauridae found from Pakistan provide a new look of titanosaurs. The skull discoveries of Pakisaurus (Marisaurus and Balochisaurus) add the skull diversity of titanosaurs from Pakistan. The Pakisaurus skull represents widely spaced teeth, and fibrous laminations on external surface of jaw and large open internal cells in the interior jaw rami. Due to dearth of cranial data and lack of common associated elements in titanosaurs has left even the most basic skeletal morphology of the clade controversial and has precluded detailed study of its higher and lower level phylogeny, but now Pakistan has this advantage which produced associated cranial, axial and appendicular elements of Pakisaurus (Marisaurus and Balochisaurus). The Pakisaurus, Marisaurus, Balochisaurus, Rapetosaurus, some Argentinean and Mongolian forms have great potential to resolve paleobiogeography, lower and higher level phylogeny of titanosaurs. Cretaceous Tertiary (K-T) boundary is well exposed on the western continental margin of Indo- Pakistan plate like Kirthar and Sulaiman basins, and on the northwestern margin like Kohat and Potwar basins. The K-T boundary sharing formations which are well exposed in the Kirthar and Sulaiman basins are the Late Cretaceous Pab/Vitakri Formation, and Paleocene Sangiali/Khadro Formation, however near to Axial belt the Cretaceous Parh and Mughal Kot formations and Paleocene Dungan Formation. Geological formations below and above the K-T boundary, in the western Salt Range are Chichali and Hangu; in the Surghar Range are Lumshiwal and Hangu; and in the Kohat and Kala Chitta-Hazara areas are Kawagarh and Hangu formations. Cretaceous Chichali/Lumshiwal Formation and Tertiary Siwalik Group represent the Infra Tertiary boundary in the Sheikh Buddin hills and Marawat Range. In Central and Eastern Salt Range, Hazara and Kashmir the boundary is represented between the varying Tertiary rocks with also varying older rocks such as Precambrian, Paleozoic and Mesozoic units. K-T boundary in Pakistan represents wide exposures of marine as well as continental condition. Indus Basin of Pakistan holds a large number of section sites for lateral and vertical rapid environmental/climate change in the Cretaceous greenhouse world. Pakistan has much potential for the study of marine as well as terrestrial Precambrian, Paleozoic, Mesozoic and Cenozoic strata, its boundaries, floras and faunas, paleoclimates, extinctions, phylogeny and paleobiogeography. Keywords: Chitral river, Global warming, Indus river basin, River flows, UBC watershed model Citedy By: 0 Development of a weather-type classification scheme for Karachi by using multivariate techniques. Author: Sadiq, N. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.5(10),2009--Pages65--79 Abstract: Weather typing or categorization continues to be popular and numerous methods have been developed over the past century for this investigation. This paper attempts to classify the types of weather for Karachi on the basis of diurnal data according to seasonal classification. The idea of using weather classification in climate change research is inspired by both uncertainties accompanying climate simulation on a regional scale, and the conflicting results of examining long-term instrumental series by traditional statistical methods. Multivariate techniques of Principal component analysis and Cluster analysis are used to obtain different types of weather for each season separately. Calculations show that we have 14, 5, 8, 7 and 8 different weather types for Monsoon, winter, summer, spring and autumn seasons respectively. Noticeable greater variations came into view for monsoon season and winter appears as least varied season. The aim of this research is to investigate the properties of the adopted clustering procedure, the consequences of the modifications introduced, and the physical interpretation of the weather types in terms of meteorological variables. Keywords: Weather Typing, Principal Component Analysis, Cluster Analysis Citedy By: 0 Trend analysis of climate change and investigation on Its probable impacts on rice production at Satkhira, Bangladesh. Author: Rimi, R. H., Rahman, S. Hafizur, Karmakar, S. and Hussain, S. G. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.6(11),NA--Pages37--50 Abstract: This study aimed at statistical analysis of the recent trend of climate change and prediction of future climate change scenarios with Global Climate Models (GCMs) and most importantly investigation on the impacts of climate change on rice production. The Satkhira district was taken as the study area, which represented the coastal zone of Bangladesh. There was a statistically non-significant increasing trend of annual maximum and minimum temperature and annual total rainfall through the period of 1950-2006. The trend analysis of seasonal rainfall for the period 1981-2006 could reveal that, from the last two decades the seasonal normal rainfall pattern has been altered. Rainfall in pre-monsoon and winter season had a decreasing trend whereas it had an increasing trend during monsoon and post-monsoon seasons. Temperature variations had an observable effect on crop yield. The summer crop Aus production was decreasing significantly. The production of Boro rice, a winter crop is increasing significantly with the increase of lowest minimum temperature. The inter-annual variation in the amount of winter season rainfall was little. Boro production, therefore, was insignificantly affected by this variable. However, correlation between the production and climatic variables was not statistically significant. In case of the future climate change prediction, GFDL-TR predicted delta values ranging from 1.1 to 1.7C for 2050, while it varied from 1.5 to 2.3C for 2070. Whereas, UKTR suggested mean temperature increase was 1.5 to 2.1C in 2050 and 1.2 to 2.7C in 2070. According to HadCM2 generated delta values, temperature would increase 1.3 to 2.9C in 2050 and 1.7 to 4.0C in 2070. It could be seen that different GCMs predicted different sets of values for rainfall increase (or decrease). Among the three GCMs, GFDL-TR predicted milder changes while HadCM2 suggested severe changes and the values increased with time. In case of rainfall, GFDL-TR and UKTR both predicted a decreasing tendency in future during winter season (DJF). However, HadCM2 suggested that there would be higher precipitation (35.6 \% increase in 2050 and 48.9 \% increase in 2070) during the winter season (DJF), which will be beneficial for agriculture. Different crop responded differently under different climate change scenarios. Yield of Boro was reduced from 3.47 to 48.64 \% in calcareous soils, while, it was increased from 0.16 to 16.47 \% in noncalcareous soil conditions. In case of T. Aman, mainly increased yields (up to 49 \% ) could be observed under rainfed conditions in future climate change scenarios. However, there was also declining trend of yields ranging from 1 to 12 \% . The most detrimental effects were observed in case of T. Aus. The yield decreased in all soil conditions and future climate scenarios. The per cent yield difference decreased from at least 5 \% up to 42 \% . In most cases, irrespective of crops and GCMs, climate change would have negative impact. Therefore, in the event of climate change the cropping pattern of the region may change considerably. Agriculture in Bangladesh is already under pressure both from increasing demands for food, and from problems of agricultural land and water resources depletion. The prospect of global climate change makes the issue particularly urgent. Keywords: GCMs, GFDL-TR, HadCM2, UKTR, statistical analysis, climate change, rice production Citedy By: 0 Climate change and water resources management in Pakistan. Author: Hussain, M. Journal: Environ Monitor,Vol.9(6),2009--Pages26--31 Abstract: Climate change is global phenomenon. United Nations has constituted Inter Governmental Panel of Climate Change (IPCC). 155 countries have signed Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC). Climate change is mainly manifested by global warming. Pakistan confronting the similar situation like most of the countries of the world. Meteorological data reveals that winter are rising and the summers are getting cooler. Temperature is expected to increase by 0.9 C and 1.5 C by years 2020 and 2050 respectively. Pakistan is blessed with nine ecological zones which exhibit varying impacts. It has surface water potential of 140 million acre feet (MAF) and underground water reserve of 56 MAF. The EI Nino and La Nina have affected hydrologic regime, surface \& ground water resources, biodiversity and ecosystems in one form or the other. Extreme events in shape of floods, droughts and glacial advances are regularly observed in Pakistan. Other impacts are pollution of water resources, loss of biodiversity, Trans-boundary water conflicts, salinization of coastal areas, desertification and low agricultural production. There is dire necessity of managing the threatened aquatic wealth of Pakistan optimally in order to preserve its quality and quantity. This gigantic task needs adoption of joint strategies and close cooperation on part of nations of the world. Keywords: Climate change, water resources management, Pakistan. Citedy By: 0 Impact of climate variability on snow cover: A case study of Northern Pakistan. Author: Butt, M. J. and Iqbal, M. F. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.5(10),2009--Pages53--63 Abstract: Climate Change is one of the major factors affecting snow cover distribution. Precipitation in the form of snow, glacier melting and rainfall are the major contributors to the ground water. Snow monitoring mapping, estimation and analysis of snowmelt runoff is time consuming and an intricate process if performed through traditional means. However, the spatial analysis of snow cover area using satellite data is an attractive and effective method. Additionally, the synoptic coverage of satellite sensors offers temporal change detection benefit as well. This study is conducted to analyze the impact of climate variability on snow cover in Northern areas of Pakistan. Satellite data archived from Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectro-radiometer (MODIS) is used in this study. In addition elevation data from Shuttle Radar Topographic Mission (SRTM) is used for the production of Digital Elevation Model (DEM). The temporal snow cover is derived from Normalized Difference Snow Index (NDSI). Temperature data of various years is being used to identify the impact of climate variability on snow cover. Temporal analysis of snow cover using spatial analysis tools revealed variations in snow cover of the study area during different months of 2000 and 2006 data. Keywords: MODIS, SRTM, DEM, NDSI, climate variability, snow cover, Northern Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Climate change impacts and vulnerability: A case-study of coastal region of Bangladesh. Author: Amin, S. M. Ashraful and Parveen, G. A. Journal: Environ Monitor,Vol.8(7--8),2009--Pages22--32 Abstract: Climate change is the greatest threat to the mankind in the 21st century. The global climate is changing far more rapidly than anticipated earlier. The challenges of climate change are multi-dimensional, multi-sectoral, immediate as well as long term. The enormous, forceful and devastating cyclone SIDR, hitting the coast of Bangladesh in November 2007, which killed several thousands of people and devastated the lives of over 30 million people, is an obvious recent example of climatic extreme. Developing countries in Asia and Africa including Bangladesh and India have been identified as extremely vulnerable and potentially most impacted countries by climate change. Further more, there is no doubt that the poor are the most vulnerable to the climate risks. This has reconfirmed the IPCC assertion that it is the poor of developing countries who are most vulnerable to the onslaught of climate change and its impacts. The poorest are in the frontline in natural disaster and they are hit the hardest by various climate impacts and natural disasters like cyclones, floods, drought and salinity. Bangladesh is already facing various climate change impacts and climate related extreme events due to its geophysical location (between the great Himalayans Mountains in the North, the Bay of Bengal in the South) and its poor socio-economic development. Recently, the country is experiencing various climate related natural disasters and extreme events like prolonged and repeated floods in the northern and central parts, severe cyclones and salinity in the coastal districts and drought in the northwest parts. These are affecting physical environment, ecosystems, natural resources bases, social and human systems severely almost every year. Climate change has severe adverse impacts on country's poverty situation and livelihoods, agriculture and food, water and health and environmental sustainability. These are putting barriers towards achieving MDGs (reducing hunger and poverty, access to water, health and basic services etc.). With rationale judgment of above mentioned context of climate change and its impacts on Bangladesh, this paper is structured around a three-tired frame-work. First, the scientific background of climate change and global warming along with the consequences of climate change are assessed. Second, the key sectoral impacts are identified and ranked along multiple indicators to establish priorities for adaptation. Third, an in depth analysis is conducted for coastal zones which have been identified as particularly vulnerable to climate change. Since the coastal districts in Bangladesh (19 districts with about 30 million people) are highly vulnerable to climate change impacts such as salinity intrusion, sea level rise, coastal flooding, water logging and devastating cyclones, this paper intends to show the probable threats of these climate events over this particular region. Through this paper an attempt has been made to identify the vulnerable areas and most impacted sectors of the coastal region against climate change and current adaptation practices at community level. This would also include the future strategies for climate change adaptation in the coastal region. Keywords: Climate change impacts, vulnerability, coastal region, Bangladesh. Citedy By: 0 Effect of climatic change on evapotranspiration and net irrigation requirements. Author: Rehman, S., Khan, M. J. and Tariq, J. A. Journal: Sarhad Journal of Agriculture,Vol.22(2),2008--Pages287--291 Abstract: A study was conducted during 2003-04 to determine the effect of climatic changes on net irrigation requirements (NIR) of wheat and maize in selected zones (Peshawar, D.LKhan, Chitral and Dir) of NWFP. Cropwat simulation model was used to simulate crop evapotranspiration and net irrigation requirement of selected crops for the past thirty years and the changes in crop evapotranspiration and net irrigation requirements of selected crops compared. Seasonal ETc of wheat increased from 0.4 to 2 \% and NIR from 2 to 25 \% in Dir, Peshawar and D.I.Khan, whereas seasonal ETc for maize increased from I to 3 \% and NIR increased from 4 to 20 \% . It may be concluded that net irrigation requirements of crops changes according to the changes in climatic parameters. Management strategies can be effective in mitigating the adverse impacts of climate changes. Keywords: climatic change, vapotranspiration, net irrigation requirements, Peshawar, D.I. Khan, Chitral , Dir Citedy By: 0 Global warming and melting glaciers along southern slopes of HKH Ranges. Author: Rasul, G., Dahe, Q. and Chaudhry, Q. Z. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology,Vol.5(9),2008--Pages63--76 Abstract: Glaciers are the most sensitive precursors of climate change due to natural and anthropogenic reasons. Using meteorological and hydrological data in combination with remote sensing data from various sources, the isothermic dynamics of heat in upslope direction was evaluated on pentad basis. It revealed that 30C isotherm has creeped upward by 725m higher elevation than 28 years before. Frequency and duration of heat waves both have increased by two fold. The rate of increased since 1990 has also been doubled resulting into frequent occurrence of severe thunderstorms and lightening events. As an example of anthropogenic change in climate, ever fastest rate of glacial depletion is presented on Siachen glacier which has lost about 2km of its length and 17 \% of ice mass since 1989. Surface velocity of the glacier has also increased considerably due to the interacting warmer atmosphere with frozen water reserves in the presence of large human concentration. Projected future temperatures would further exaggerate the ice depletion and drift related dynamic process making the situation more and more complex for the planners and dependants. Keywords: Global warming, melting glaciers,HKH Ranges Citedy By: 0 Holocene evolution of the Indus delta under the influence of an intensified summer monsoon. Author: Clift, P. D., Giosan, L., Blusztajn, J., Tabrez, A. R., Danish, M. and Rabbani, M. M. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Oceanography,Vol.2(2),2008--Pages1--10 Abstract: The first scientific drilling of the Indus delta now allows the response of the river to Holocene sea-level rise and climate change to be documented. Despite rising sea levels after the Younger Dryas the Indus Delta continued to prograde, with the shoreline migrating to the SW since 8 ka. A provenance analysis of Holocene sediments from the delta was performed. Bulk sediment Nd isotope analysis reveals a dramatic shift at 1014 ka away from erosion of the Karakoram and towards more sediment flux from the Himalaya. Radiometric Ar-Ar dating of muscovite and U-Pb dating of zircon sand grains indicates that the Lesser rather than the Greater Himalaya eroded more strongly as the summer monsoon intensified after 14 ka. We suggest that it is intensified monsoon precipitation in the Himalaya at 118 ka that increases erosion and results in a pulse of sediment rapidly reaching the Arabian Sea, allowing the Indus delta to prograde during a time of rising sea levels contrary to what might be predicted from sequence stratigraphic models. This millennial-scale variation is preserved in sediments from the delta, but not in the deep Arabian Sea, due to sediment buffering. Keywords: Holocene, Indus delta , summer monsoon, erosion Citedy By: 0 Effect of Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium fertilization on the Koenigia islandica growth in the Field. Author: Rashid, Q. and Headley, A. D. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,Vol.7(3),2005--Pages406--409 Abstract: Koenigia islandica has a disjunctive Arctic and sub Arctic circumpolar distribution extended Southward to several isolated mountain ranges of Northern Europe, Asia and North America. The population of this plant on the Isle of Skye at altitude 461-726 m and on Isle of Mull at 385-523 m is the most Southerly in Europe and, therefore, the most vulnerable to the climatic fluctuations on numbers and survivorship. Annual habit of K islandica makes it particularly vulnerable to adverse conditions. Increased microbial activity due to elevated temperature in tundra soil provides nutrients, particularly nitrogen, to plants. Therefore, K. islandica will be outcompeted by other plant species. Conservation biologists need to monitor these changes when species cannot adapt to climate change. Keywords: Nitrogen, Phosphorus, Potassium, fertilization, Koenigia islandica, Citedy By: 0 Preserving the Biodiversity. Author: Sheikh, B. A. and Sheikh, S. A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agriculture, Agricultural Engineering and Veterinary Sciences,Vol.20(1),NA--Pages48--51 Abstract: Although during past two centuries, human activities on earth have led to technological advancements, yet they have not been with out environment deterioration severely affecting our natural resources in a manner which can hardly be rehabilitated. The study of biodiversity is the study of survival on earth. The complexity of factors affecting it includes, the fast deteriorating state of our planet, resulting in resource depletion, habitual destruction, deforestation, species elimination, land degradation, environmental pollution, global climate change and their impact on ecosystem degradation. The maintenance of a balance between living and non-living entities including its conservation vis- a -vis the nature has been discussed in the emerging scenario. Keywords: Biodiversity, human activity, natural resources, deforestation, species elimination, land degradation Citedy By: 0 Climate change: present and future risks to health, and necessary responses Author: A. J. McMichael, E. Lindgren Journal: Journal of internal medicine,Vol.270(5),2011--Pages Abstract: McMichael AJ, Lindgren E (The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia; and Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden). Climate change: present and future risks to health, and necessary responses (Review).J Intern Med2011;270: 401413. Recent observed changes in Earths climate, to which humans have contributed substantially, are affecting various health outcomes. These include altered distributions of some infectious disease vectors (ticks at high latitudes, malaria mosquitoes at high altitudes), and an uptrend in extreme weather events and associated deaths, injuries and other health outcomes. Future climate change, if unchecked, will have increasing, mostly adverse, health impacts both direct and indirect. Climate change will amplify health problems in vulnerable regions, influence infectious disease emergence, affect food yields and nutrition, increase risks of climate-related disasters and impair mental health. The health sector should assist society understand the risks to health and the needed responses. Keywords: Citedy By: 165 The causality analysis of climate change and large-scale human crisis Author: David D. Zhanga, Harry F. Lee,Cong Wangd, Baosheng Lie,Qing Peia, Jane Zhangf, and Yulun Anc Journal: Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the United state of America,Vol.108(42),2011--Pages Abstract: Recent studies have shown strong temporal correlations between past climate changes and societal crises. However, the specific causal mechanisms underlying this relation have not been addressed. We explored quantitative responses of 14 fine-grained agro-ecological, socioeconomic, and demographic variables to climate fluctuations from A.D. 15001800 in Europe. Results show that cooling from A.D. 15601660 caused successive agro-ecological, socioeconomic, and demographic catastrophes, leading to the General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century. We identified a set of causal linkages between climate change and human crisis. Using temperature data and climate-driven economic variables, we simulated the alternation of defined golden and dark ages in Europe and the Northern Hemisphere during the past millennium. Our findings indicate that climate change was the ultimate cause, and climate-driven economic downturn was the direct cause, of large-scale human crises in preindustrial Europe and the Northern Hemisphere. Keywords: Citedy By: 180 In Search of Warmer Climates? The Impact of Climate Change on Flows of British Tourists Author: DavidMaddison Journal: Climatic Change,Vol.49(1-2),2001--Pages Abstract: This paper investigates the impact of climate change on the chosendestinations of Britishtourists. Destinations are characterised in terms of attractors includingclimate variables, traveland accommodation costs. These variables are used to explain the currentobserved pattern ofoverseas travel in terms of a model based upon the idea of utilitymaximisation. The approachpermits the trade-offs between climate and holiday expenditure to be analysedand effectivelyidentifies the optimal climate for generating tourism. The findings are usedto predict the impactof various climate change scenarios on popular tourist destinations. Keywords: Citedy By: 357 Future change of temperature and precipitation extremes in South America as derived from the PRECIS regional climate modeling system Author: J. A. Marengo, R. Jones, L. M. Alves, M. C. Valverde Journal: International Journal of Climatology,Vol.29(15),2009--Pages Abstract: Using the PRECIS regional climate modeling system this study analyses the distribution of extremes of temperature and precipitation in South America in the recent past (19611990) and in a future (20712100) climate under the IPCC SRES A2 and B2 emissions scenarios. The results show that for the present climate the model simulates well the spatial distribution of extreme temperature and rainfall events when compared with observations, with temperature the more realistic. The observations over the region are far from comprehensive which compromises the assessment of model quality. In all the future climate scenarios considered all parts of the region would experience significant and often different changes in rainfall and temperature extremes. In the future, the occurrence of warm nights is projected to be more frequent in the entire tropical South America while the occurrence of cold night events is likely to decrease. Significant changes in rainfall extremes and dry spells are also projected. These include increased intensity of extreme precipitation events over most of Southeastern South America and western Amazonia consistent with projected increasing trends in total rainfall in these regions. In Northeast Brazil and eastern Amazonia smaller or no changes are seen in projected rainfall intensity though significant changes are seen in the frequency of consecutive dry days. Copyright 2009 Royal Meteorological Society Keywords: Citedy By: 331 Climate change at the 4.2 ka BP termination of the Indus valley civilization and Holocene south Asian monsoon variability Author: M. Staubwasser, F. Sirocko, P. M. Grootes, M. S Journal: Geophysical Research Letters ,Vol.30(8),2003--Pages Abstract: Planktonic oxygen isotope ratios off the Indus delta reveal climate changes with a multi-centennial pacing during the last 6 ka, with the most prominent change recorded at 4.2 ka BP. Opposing isotopic trends across the northern Arabian Sea surface at that time indicate a reduction in Indus river discharge and suggest that later cycles also reflect variations in total annual rainfall over south Asia. The 4.2 ka event is coherent with the termination of urban Harappan civilization in the Indus valley. Thus, drought may have initiated southeastward habitat tracking within the Harappan cultural domain. The late Holocene drought cycles following the 4.2 ka BP event vary between 200 and 800 years and are coherent with the evolution of cosmogenic 14C production rates. This suggests that solar variability is one fundamental cause behind Holocene rainfall changes over south Asia. Keywords: Citedy By: 304 GIS-based high-resolution spatial interpolation of precipitation in mountainplain areas of Upper Pakistan for regional climate change impact studies Author: MuhammadWaseemAshiq, , ChuanyanZhao, JianNi, MuhammadAkhtar Journal: Theoretical and Applied Climatology,Vol.99(239),2010--Pages Abstract: In this study, the baseline period (19601990) precipitation simulation of regional climate model PRECIS is evaluated and downscaled on a monthly basis for northwestern Himalayan mountains and upper Indus plains of Pakistan. Different interpolation models in GIS environment are used to generate fine scale (250??250 m2) precipitation surfaces from PRECIS precipitation data. Results show that the multivariate extension model of ordinary kriging that uses elevation as secondary data is the best model especially for monsoon months. Model results are further compared with observations from 25 meteorological stations in the study area. Modeled data show overall good correlation with observations confirming the ability of PRECIS to capture major precipitation features in the region. Results for low and erratic precipitation months, September and October, are however showing poor correlation with observations. During monsoon months (June, July, August) precipitation pattern is different from the rest of the months. It increases from south to north, but during monsoon maximum precipitation is in the southern regions of the Himalayas, and extreme northern areas receive very less precipitation. Modeled precipitation toward the end of the twenty-first century under A2 and B2 scenarios show overall decrease during winter and increase in spring and monsoon in the study area. Spatially, both scenarios show similar pattern but with varying magnitude. In monsoon, the Himalayan southern regions will have more precipitation, whereas northern areas and southern plains will face decrease in precipitation. Western and south western areas will suffer from less precipitation throughout the year except peak monsoon months. T test results also show that changes in monthly precipitation over the study area are significant except for July, August, and December. Result of this study provide reliable basis for further climate change impact studies on various resources. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Dividing climate change: global warming in the Indian mass media Author: SimonBillett Journal: Climaticchange,Vol.99(1-2),2010--Pages Abstract: Much research has now been conducted into the representation of climate change in the media. Specifically, the communication of climate change from scientists and policy-makers to the public via the mass media has been a subject of major interest because of its implications for creating national variation in public understanding of a global environmental issue. However, to date, no study has assessed the situation in India. As one of the major emerging economies, and so one of the major greenhouse gas emitters, India is a key actor in the climate change story. This study analyses the four major, national circulation English-language newspapers to quantify and qualify the frames through which climate change is represented in India. The results strongly contrast with previous studies from developed countries; by framing climate change along a risk-responsibility divide, the Indian national press set up a strongly nationalistic position on climate change that divides the issue along both developmental and postcolonial lines. Keywords: Citedy By: 176 An Abrupt Climate Change Scenario and its Implications for United States National Security Author: Schwartz, Peter , Randall, Doug Journal: ClimateChange,Vol.(),2003--Pages Abstract: The purpose of this report is to imagine the unthinkable to push the boundaries of current research on climate change so we may better understand the potential implications on United States national security. We have interviewed leading climate change scientists, conducted additional research, and reviewed several iterations of the scenario with these experts. The scientists support this project, but caution that the scenario depicted is extreme in two fundamental ways. First, they suggest the occurrences we outline would most likely happen in a few regions, rather than on globally. Second, they say the magnitude of the event may be considerably smaller. We have created a climate change scenario that although not the most likely, is plausible, and would challenge United States national security in ways that should be considered immediately. Keywords: Climate, National Security, Weather, Adverse Conditions, Atmospheric Motion, Global, Iterations, Scenarios, Scientists, Soils, United States, Wind Citedy By: 567 Vulnerability of Bangladesh to Climate Change and Sea Level Rise through Tropical Cyclones and Storm Surges Author: A Ali Journal: Climate Change Vulnerability and Adaptation in Asia and the Pacific,Vol.(),1996--Pages Abstract: Bangladesh is frequently visited by natural disasters such as tropical cyclones, storm surges, floods, droughts, tornadoes, and norwesters. Of these, tropical cyclones originating in the Bay of Bengal and associated storm surges are the most disastrous. There are various reasons for the disastrous effects of cyclones and storm surges in Bangladesh. Superimposed on these disastrous effects, climate change and any consequent sea level rise are likely to add fuel to the fire. Arise in temperature is likely to change cyclone activity: cyclone intensity, if not cyclone frequency, may increase. As a result, storm surges may also increase substantially. Sea level rise, an increase in cyclone intensity, and consequent increases in storm surge heights will have disastrous effects on a deltaic country like Bangladesh, which is not much above the mean sea level. This paper examines the climatology of cyclones in the Bay of Bengal for the last 110 years and trends in cyclone frequency and intensity. The phenomenon of storm surges in the Bay of Bengal is examined along with the primary reasons for the severity of storm surges in Bangladesh. The paper discusses both qualitatively and quantitatively the impacts of rises in temperature on tropical cyclone intensity in Bangladesh. With the use of a mathematical model developed for the simulation of storm surges along the Bangladesh coast, various scenarios of storm surges are developed. Using lower and upper bounds of sea surface temperature rise of 2 and 4C and of sea level rise of 0.3 and 1.0 m (according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change standard), the model simulates the maximum possible surges that are likely to occur under these conditions. Keywords: Bangladeshcoastal resourcesstorm surgestropical cyclones Citedy By: 191 Antarctica and environmental change - The Southern Ocean benthic fauna and climate change: a historical perspective Author: A Clarke, JA Crame Journal: The Royal Society ,Vol.338(1285),1992--Pages Abstract: Environmental change is the norm and it is likely that, particularly on the geological timescale, the temperature regime experienced by marine organisms has never been stable. These temperature changes vary in timescale from daily, through seasonal variations, to long-term environmental change over tens of millions of years. Whereas physiological work can give information on how individual organisms may react phenotypically to short-term change, the way benthic communities react to long-term change can only be studied from the fossil record. The present benthic marine fauna of the Southern Ocean is rich and diverse, consisting of a mixture of taxa with differing evolutionary histories and biogeographical affinities, suggesting that at no time in the Cenozoic did continental ice sheets extend sufficiently to eradicate all shallow-water faunas around Antarctica at the same time. Nevertheless, certain features do suggest the operation of vicariant processes, and climatic cycles affecting distributional ranges and ice-sheet extension may both have enhanced speciation processes. The overall cooling of southern high-latitude seas since the mid-Eocene has been neither smooth nor steady. Intermittent periods of global warming and the influence of Milankovitch cyclicity is likely to have led to regular pulses of migration in and out of Antarctica. The resultant diversity pump may explain in part the high species richness of some marine taxa in the Southern Ocean. It is difficult to suggest how the existing fauna will react to present global warming. Although it is certain the fauna will change, as all faunas have done throughout evolutionary time, we cannot predict with confidence how it will do so. Keywords: Citedy By: 195 Challenges to Manage the Risk of Water Scarcity and Climate Change in the Mediterranean Author: A Iglesias,L Garrote, F Flores, M Moneo Journal: Water Resources Management,Vol.21(5),2007--Pages Abstract: The Mediterranean region is undergoing rapid local and global social and environmental changes. All indicators point to an increase in environmental and water scarcity problems with negative implications towards current and future sustainability. Water management in Mediterranean countries is challenged these pressures and needs to evolve to reach the target of increasing population with reliable access to freshwater established by the Millennium Development Goals. This paper first reviews and evaluates current and future social and environmental pressures on water resources, including climate change. The results show that pressures are not homogeneous across the region and sectors of water use. Second the paper evaluates the adaptation strategies to cope with water scarcity, including technology, use of strategic groundwater, and management. Finally, the paper proposes a framework for managing the risk of water scarcity based on preparedness rather than a crisis approach. The importance of local management at the basin level is emphasized, but the potential benefits depend on the appropriate multi-institutional and multi-stakeholder coordination. Keywords: water scarcityclimate changerisk managementMediterranean Citedy By: 313 Climate Change, Poverty and Environmental Crisis in the Disaster Prone Areas of Pakistan Author: Abbass, Zehar Journal: Climate Change and Resilience,,Vol.5(3),2009--Pages Abstract: This study was commissioned to review the impact of climate change on Pakistan's rural disaster-prone communities in Badin (Sindh), Rajanpur (Punjab), and Khuzdar (Balochistan). The study's aim was to review community perceptions of the impact of climate change and recommend coping mechanisms for affected communities. The findings will support different organisations and institutions to initiate adaptation programmes. This report has helped Oxfam GB to initiate an adaptation programme in the coastal communities of Pakistan. The findings of the study are remarkably consistent with global, regional, and national climate change projections and alarming clearly show that environmental problems in the three districts are serious and growing, and climate change is exacerbating them. Poor and marginalised communities tend to be those most vulnerable to climate change and least able to cope with weather-related disasters because of lack of access to information and resources to reduce their risk. Keywords: Citedy By: 11 Climate Change Impact on River Flows in Chitral Watershed Author: Abdul Sattar Shakir, Habib -ur- Rehman, Saqib Ehsan Journal: PakistanJournal of Engineering and Applied sciences,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: The impact of climate change has always been very important for water resources in the world. In countries like Pakistan where different weather conditions exist, the effects of climate change can be more crucial. Generally, the climate changes are considered in terms of global warming i.e. increase in the average temperature of earths near surface air. The global warming can have a strong impact on river flows in Pakistan. This may be due to the melting of snow and glaciers at a higher rate and changes in precipitation patterns. Glaciers in Pakistan cover about 13,680 km2 which is 13% of the mountainous regions of the Upper Indus Basin. Glacier and Snowmelt water from these glaciers contributes significantly to the river flows in Pakistan. Due to climate change, the changes in temperature and the amount of precipitation could have diversified effects on river flows of arid and semi-arid regions of Pakistan. This paper reviews the existing research studies on climate change impact on water resources of Pakistan. The past trend of river flows in Pakistan has been discussed with respect to the available data. Further, different projections about future climate changes in terms of glacier melting & changes in temperature and precipitation have also been taken into consideration in order to qualitatively assess the future trend of river flows in Pakistan. As a case study, the flows were generated for the Chitral watershed using UBC Watershed Model. Model was calibrated for the year 2002, which is an average flow year. Model results show good agreement between simulated and observed flows. UBC watershed model was applied to a climate change scenario of 1oC increase in temperature and 15% decrease in glaciated area. Results of the study reveal that the flows were decreased by about 4.2 %. Keywords: Citedy By: 11 Climate change: Pakistan must invest in adaptation Author: Abdur Rehman Cheema Journal: Nature,Vol.514(7522),2014--Pages Abstract: Floods in Pakistan this year alone have killed hundreds of people, left millions homeless and destroyed crops over tens of thousands of hectares. In itsGlobal Climate Risk Index 2014, the think tank Germanwatch ranked Pakistan third in its list of countries most affected by climate change, after Haiti and the Philippines. Yet Pakistan's climate-change budget for 201314 was 44%lower than the previous year's. Furthermore, the federal government has largely devolved responsibility for environmental issues to the provinces, which cannot or will not commit resources to climate-change policies. It is important that the principles of disaster management are simplified so that the public can understand them and question government responses where necessary. Many citizens already realize that towns are being flooded as a result of illegal building on neighbouring floodplains and waterways. Diplomacy in India and Pakistan has secured reciprocal arrangements for flood relief, but this is not enough. Rainfall data need to be coordinated and exchanged between the two countries to improve flood forecasting and disaster-management governance through organizations such as the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation. Pakistan and most other developing countries have little influence on actions determined by Western countries to reduce carbon emissions. The best option for developing nations is to offset the negative effects of rising temperatures and extreme events by developing weather-tolerant crops and housing, by planning for effective land use, and by improving energy efficiency. Keywords: Citedy By: 3 Pleistocene Climate Change in Arabia: Developing a Framework for Hominin Dispersal over the Last 350 ka Author: AdrianG.Parker, Journal: The Evolution of Human Populations in Arabia,Vol.(),2009--Pages Abstract: Environmental change in Arabia has oscillated between climatic extremes throughout the Quaternary period with evidence for ancient pluvials, apparent in the lacustrine sediments, alluvial fans and gravels, paleosols, and speleothems (e.g., McClure, 1976; Schultz and Whitney, 1986; Parker et al., 2006a, 2006b; Lzine et al., 2007; Fleitmann et al., 2007). Conversely, there are numerous signals that Arabia was also subjected to extremes in aridity, most obviously manifested in the expansive sand seas comprising the Nafud, Rub al Khali, and Wahiba deserts, as well as fracture calcites from hyperalkaline springs (Clark and Fontes, 1990) and petrogypsic soil horizons (Rose, 2006). Evidence for small eroded lake basins comprising marl terraces and hardened evaporitic crusts, with associated freshwater shells and lithic implements scattered around the edges were reported in the Rub al Khali during early exploration of the region (e.g., Philby, 1933; Holm, 1960; Clark, 1989). Occurrences of ancient stone tools near relict lake beds in Arabia provided the first evidence for a rich prehistoric past (Caton-Thompson, 1953; Field, 1958). To date, however, the association between humans and environment is still much in its infancy and the precise relationships between human dispersals into and across Arabia is not fully understood. Both environmental and archaeological research has made significant progress in recent years but, to date, no major synthesis has been attempted which provides the environmental backdrop for assessing hominin emergence within the Arabian peninsula. The aim of this chapter is to present an overview of the variable and shifting landscapes in Arabia during the past 350 ka (isotope stage 9 to the present) with particular emphasis on indicators of pluvial conditions (mostly lacustrine sediments and alluvial sediments along with supporting data from other proxy sources). These data provide a useful framework for understanding the role of the climate in influencing Pleistocene hominin dispersals and occupation across the Arabian Corridor a critical geographic zone that we now know served as a conduit bridging early human populations in Europe, Africa, and Asia (Parker and Rose, 2008). Keywords: ChronologyClimate ChangeDispersalPleistocene Citedy By: 86 A record of Holocene climate change from lake geochemical analyses in southeastern Arabia Author: AG Parker, AS Goudie, S Stokes,K White Journal: Quaternary Research,Vol.66(3),2006--Pages Abstract: Lacustrine sediments from southeastern Arabia reveal variations in lake level corresponding to changes in the strength and duration of Indian Ocean Monsoon (IOM) summer rainfall and winter cyclonic rainfall. The late glacial/Holocene transition of the region was characterised by the development of mega-linear dunes. These dunes became stabilised and vegetated during the early Holocene and interdunal lakes formed in response to the incursion of the IOM at approximately 8500cal yr BP with the development of C3 dominated savanna grasslands. The IOM weakened ca. 6000cal yr BP with the onset of regional aridity, aeolian sedimentation and dune reactivation and accretion. Despite this reduction in precipitation, the lake was maintained by winter dominated rainfall. There was a shift to drier adapted C4 grasslands across the dune field. Lake sediment geochemical analyses record precipitation minima at 8200, 5000 and 4200cal yr BP that coincide with Bond events in the North Atlantic. A number of these events correspond with changes in cultural periods, suggesting that climate was a key mechanism affecting human occupation and exploitation of this region. Keywords: Arabia ArchaeologyGeochemistry Holocene Lake levels Abrupt climate change Citedy By: 178 Determinants of the Corporate Decision to Disclose Social Information Author: Ahmed Belkaoui, Philip G. Karpik Journal: Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal ,Vol.(),1989--Pages Abstract: The decision to disclose social information in annual reports is a voluntary one. A positive model of the factors that may influence firms' decisions to disclose social information is proposed. It is hypothesised that the decision may be affected by (a) social performance, (b) political visibility, (c) financial variables, and (d) economic performance. It is found that the decision to disclose social information is well explained by the model and that the key explanatory variables are social performance and political visibility. Keywords: Accounting theory,Economics,Performance,Models,USA,Company reports Citedy By: 778 Determinants of the Corporate Decision to Disclose Social Information Author: Ahmed Belkaoui, Philip G. Karpik, Journal: Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal ,Vol.(),1989--Pages Abstract: The decision to disclose social information in annual reports is a voluntary one. A positive model of the factors that may influence firms' decisions to disclose social information is proposed. It is hypothesised that the decision may be affected by (a) social performance, (b) political visibility, (c) financial variables, and (d) economic performance. It is found that the decision to disclose social information is well explained by the model and that the key explanatory variables are social performance and political visibility. Keywords: Accounting theory,Economics,Performance,Models,USA,Company reports Citedy By: 778 Adaptation to Climate Change in Bangladesh: Future Outlook Author: AhsanUddinAhmed,MozaharulAlam,A.AtiqRahman, Journal: Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate Change for Bangladesh,Vol.(),1999--Pages Abstract: The human induced climate change is no longer a theoretical concept. There is a global consensus among scientists, professionals, academics, policy makers and strategists that the globe has already committed to certain degree of change in climate system. Climate change will affect all human and ecological systems and socio-economic development activities. Pressure has been mounting on the global leadership to take necessary steps in response to changes in climate system Keywords: Citedy By: 69 Globalization, Climate Change, and Human Health Author: AJ McMichael Journal: New England Journal of Medicine,,Vol.(),2013--Pages Abstract: The global scale, interconnectedness, and economic intensity of contemporary human activity are historically unprecedented,1as are many of the consequent environmental and social changes. These global changes fundamentally influence patterns of human health, international health care, and public health activities.2They constitute a syndrome, not a set of separate changes, that reflects the interrelated pressures, stresses, and tensions arising from an overly large world population, the pervasive and increasingly systemic environmental impact of many economic activities, urbanization, the spread of consumerism, and the widening gap between rich and poor both within and between countries. Keywords: Citedy By: 242 Climate change and human health: present and future risks Author: AJ McMichael, RE Woodruff,S Hales- The Lancet, 2006 - Elsevier Journal: The Lancet ,Vol.367(9513),2006--Pages Abstract: Here is near unanimous scientific consensus that greenhouse gas emissions generated by human activity will change Earth's climate. The recent (globally averaged) warming by 05C is partly attributable to such anthropogenic emissions. Climate change will affect human health in many waysmostly adversely. Here, we summarise the epidemiological evidence of how climate variations and trends affect various health outcomes. We assess the little evidence there is that recent global warming has already affected some health outcomes. We review the published estimates of future health effects of climate change over coming decades. Research so far has mostly focused on thermal stress, extreme weather events, and infectious diseases, with some attention to estimates of future regional food yields and hunger prevalence. An emerging broader approach addresses a wider spectrum of health risks due to the social, demographic, and economic disruptions of climate change. Evidence and anticipation of adverse health effects will strengthen the case for pre-emptive policies, and will also guide priorities for planned adaptive strategies Keywords: Citedy By: 1610 Chapter 10 Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction in Pakistan Author: Amir Nawaz Khan, Journal: Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction: An Asian Perspective,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: Pakistan lies between latitudes 24 37' N and longitudes 62 75' E, covering a total land area of 796,096km2. The country shares its borders with Iran to the west, India in the southeast, Afghanistan in the northwest, and China in the north. The Arabian Sea lies to its south (UNISDR, 2005;Khan, 2004d). The country has four provinces: the Punjab, the North West Frontier Province (NWFP), Sindh, Baluchistan, and two federally administrated territories the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and the Northern Areas. The Northern Areas have been recently given the status of Gilgit-Baltistan province. The structure of the provisional government is still in its formation stage. In addition, the territory of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) is under the administration of the government of Pakistan. Each province or territory is further divided into administrative units known as districts (GOP, 2003;Khan, 2004d). Keywords: Citedy By: 10 Climate change and local level disaster risk reduction planning: need, opportunities and challenges Author: AnchaSrinivasan,RajibShaw,S.V.R.K.Prabhakar, Journal: Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,Vol.(),2009--Pages Abstract: The field of climate change is full of uncertainties that are limiting strategic disaster risk reduction planning. In this paper, however, we argued that there is lot to do before we get our hands on reliable estimates of future climate change impacts. It includes bringing together different stakeholders in a framework suggested in this paper, developing case studies that reflect long-term local impacts of climate change, capacity building of local stakeholders that enables them to take decisions under uncertainty etc. We proposed a simple scheme that brings together climate, disaster and policy community together to start a dialogue in a run-up to understanding wider aspects of long-term risk reduction at local level. Strategic thinking, which has only been restricted to national and regional planning to date, needs to be inculcated in local level disaster risk reduction and policy personnel as well. There is a need to move from the attitude of considering local level players as implementers to innovators for which developing a network of self learning and evolving organizations are required at the local level. Keywords: Local disaster risk reduction planningClimate changeStrategic planningUncertaintyClimate task group Citedy By: 66 Socio-Economic and Physical Perspectives of Water related Vulnerability to Climate Change: Results of Field Study in Bangladesh Author: A.M Choudhury1 , D. A. Quadir2 and A. U. Ahmed3 Journal: Science 2005,Vol.(),2005--Pages Abstract: The present paper deals with the socio-economic perspectives of the water related vulnerability to climate change based upon the data collected from the Selected Hydrological Unit (SHU) through questionnaire survey supported by PRA/FGD and interview with key Informants. The SHU which is situated in the northern part of Bangladesh to the left Bank of the river Brahmaputra (locally named as Jamuna) is highly vulnerable to floods. The analysis of the past climate of Bangladesh shows that the average temperature increases at the rate of 0.16o C/decade. The pre-monsoon and monsoon rainfall has increased by about 20 % during the past 30 years. The hydrological observations show that the frequency of severe floods and the intensity have been found to increase during the last 3 decades. The scenarios of climate change as obtained through the analysis of the outputs of HadRM2 regional climate model shows that the annual mean temperature over the region of the SHU is expected to rise by 1.5 and 2.8o C by 2020 and 2050respectively relative to 1990 and the annual precipitation by 9.1 and 22.7% for the above two time levels. The pre-monsoon precipitation would increase by 27 and 70%. The monsoon precipitation is expected to increase by 4.2% and 9.7% for the above two time levels. The SHU is highly vulnerable to severe floods. The lives of the people are seriously affected by the severe floods, dwelling houses are inundated and damaged and the resources such as agriculture, livestock and fisheries also suffer severe damages. People suffer from the lack of shelter, food, medicine and potable water. The increased rainfall is expected to further increase the flood intensity and enhance the vulnerability in the future. The riverbank erosion has been identified as another water related hazard which is more active during the floods. The people are coping to some extent in the agriculture sector. They wait until the peak flood is over for planting of the aman rice which is grown in the monsoon and postmonsoon season. In case, the crops were damaged due to severe floods, the farmers replant the aman rice in the fields as soon as the flood water recedes. It came out from the field information that the farmers do not depend on the aman rice anymore as they have shifted towards the irrigated cultivation in the dry season to recover the crop damages due to floods in the monsoon season. However, they have not abandoned the aman rice cultivation, because if there is no flood they can get a very good harvest. As regards the adaptation in other sectors such as housing, livestock, etc. Strong houses need to be built by raising the lands above flood level so that neither the dwelling houses nor the lawn of the houses are affected. In that case the livestock will not be affected anymore. This will solve the problems permanently and reduce the sufferings. However, a huge majority of the people lives below the poverty line and can not afford these 2 expensive coping options. Thus poverty alleviation is identified as a crucial means of increasing the adaptive capacity of the people. Keywords: Citedy By: 38 Modeling snowmelt-runoff under climate scenarios in the Hunza River basin, Karakoram Range, Northern Pakistan Author: AA Tahir, P Chevallier, Y Arnaud, L Neppel Journal: Journal of Hydrology,Vol.409(1-2),2011--Pages Abstract: A major proportion of flow in the Indus River is contributed by its snow and glacier-fed river catchments situated in the Karakoram Range. It is therefore essential to estimate the snowmelt runoff from these catchments (with no or scarce precipitation records) for water resources management. The snowmelt runoff model (SRM) integrated with MODIS remote-sensing snow cover products was selected to simulate the daily discharges and to study the climate change impact on these discharges in the Hunza River basin (the snow- and glacier-fed sub-catchment of the Indus River). The results obtained suggest that the SRM can be used efficiently in the snow- and glacier-fed sub-catchments of the Upper Indus River Basin (UIB). The application of the SRM under future climate (mean temperature, precipitation and snow cover) change scenarios indicates a doubling of summer runoff until the middle of this century. This analysis suggests that new reservoirs will be necessary for summer flow storage to meet with the needs of irrigation supply, increasing power generation demand, flood control and water supply. Keywords: Upper Indus River Basin (UIB), Hunza River basin, MODIS Water resources management Snowmelt-Runoff Model, Climate change Citedy By: 85 Climate changeperspective inPakistan Author: AB Farooqi, AH Khan, H Mir Journal: PakistanJournal of Meteorology,Vol.2(3),2005--Pages Abstract: The objective of the study is to assess the past climate changes and compute the projected changes in different Agro-climatic regions of country for next half century using Regional and Global Climate models. In view of these changes, vulnerabilities of different regions may be accessed and suitable coping mechanisms/ adaptation strategies be proposed. Analysis of past depicts that our climate is changing. The rate of change and the nature of the resulting impacts will vary over time and across the country, affecting all aspects of our life. In conjunction with efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, it will also be necessary to adapt to the impacts of a changing climate. Understanding what climate change will mean for Pakistan is only one step in that process.Future changes in climate of the magnitude projected by most global climate models would cause a major impact on our water resources, and subsequently affect food supply, health, industry, transportation and ecosystem sustainability. Problems are most likely to arise to southern parts of country where the resource is already under stress, because that stress would be exacerbated by changes in supply or demand associated with climate change.Previous record and projections by GCMs and RCMs depicts that extreme events (drought and flooding) would become more frequent and of greater magnitude in different parts of the country. These extreme events would place stress on existing infrastructure and institutions, with potentially major economic, social and environmental consequences. Therefore, particular emphasis needs to be placed on the impacts/mitigation of such extremes Keywords: Citedy By: 79 The geological methane budget at Continental Margins and its influence on climate change Author: A. G. Judd,M. Hovland, L. I. Dimitrov,S. Garca Gil,V. Jukes Journal: GEOFLUIDS ,Vol.2(2),2002--Pages Abstract: Geological methane, generated by microbial decay and the thermogenic breakdown of organic matter, migrates towards the surface (seabed) to be trapped in reservoirs, sequestered by gas hydrates or escape through natural gas seeps or mud volcanoes (via ebullition). The total annual geological contribution to the atmosphere is estimated as 1640 Terragrammes (Tg) methane; much of this natural flux is fossil in origin. Emissions are affected by surface conditions (particularly the extent of ice sheets and permafrost), eustatic sea-level and ocean bottom-water temperatures. However, the different reservoirs and pathways are affected in different ways. Consequently, geological sources provide both positive and negative feedback to global warming and global cooling. Gas hydrates are not the only geological contributors to feedback. It is suggested that, together, these geological sources and reservoirs influence the direction and speed of global climate change, and constrain the extremes of climate. Keywords: Citedy By: 268 Worldwide Testing of the Snowmelt Runoff Model with Applications for Predicting the Effects of Climate Change Author: A Rango Journal: Hydrology Research,Vol.23(3),1992--Pages Abstract: The Snowmelt-Runoff Model (SRM), a simple degree-day model, has been applied to over 50 basins in 15 countries around the world. Where results have been reported, the averageR2has been 0.84 and the average seasonal volume difference,Dv, has been 3.8 %. The testing of SRM has taken place on basins in different climatic regions, thus setting the stage for using SRM in evaluations of the hydrological effects of climate change. A method for using SRM in evaluations of climate change has been established and tested on several basins. Initial results show some potentially serious problems involving water supply, flooding, and drought. More testing in a variety of climatic regions is necessary along with improved specification of the changes in temperature and precipitation by region. Keywords: Citedy By: 79 Climate change and vector-borne diseases: a regional analysis Author: Andrew K. GithekoI, Steve W. LindsayII, Ulisses E. ConfalonieriIII, Jonathan A. Patz Journal: Bulletin of the World Health Organization,Vol.78(9),2000--Pages Abstract: Current evidence suggests that inter-annual and inter-decadal climate variability have a direct influence on the epidemiology of vector-borne diseases. This evidence has been assessed at the continental level in order to determine the possible consequences of the expected future climate change. By 2100 it is estimated that average global temperatures will have risen by 1.03.5 C, increasing the likelihood of many vector-borne diseases in new areas. The greatest effect of climate change on transmission is likely to be observed at the extremes of the range of temperatures at which transmission occurs. For many diseases these lie in the range 1418 C at the lower end and about 3540 C at the upper end. Malaria and dengue fever are among the most important vector-borne diseases in the tropics and subtropics; Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in the USA and Europe. Encephalitis is also becoming a public health concern. Health risks due to climatic changes will differ between countries that have developed health infrastructures and those that do not. Human settlement patterns in the different regions will influence disease trends. While 70% of the population in South America is urbanized, the proportion in sub-Saharan Africa is less than 45%. Climatic anomalies associated with the El NioSouthern Oscillation phenomenon and resulting in drought and floods are expected to increase in frequency and intensity. They have been linked to outbreaks of malaria in Africa, Asia and South America. Climate change has far-reaching consequences and touches on all life-support systems. It is therefore a factor that should be placed high among those that affect human health and survival. Keywords: greenhouse effect; disease vectors; disease malaria, transmission; Lyme disease, leishmaniasis, communicable diseases, health surveys Citedy By: 51 Enteric fermentation and ruminant eructation: the role (and control?) of methane in the climate change debate Author: AndyThorpe, Journal: Climatic change, 2009,Vol.93(3-4),2009--Pages Abstract: Anthropogenic processes are responsible for between 55% and 70% of the estimated 600Tg of methane that is released annually into the atmosphere, with enteric fermentation a major contributor to emissions in a number of countries. This paper therefore reviews current levels of CH4discharges by both animal type and country, and shows how the growth or decline in national herds over the last 20years has significantly altered the global composition of enteric emissions. As developing countries are now responsible for almost three-quarters of such emissions, this has important implications in terms of mitigation strategiesparticularly as such countries are presently outside the remit of the Kyoto Protocol. Keywords: Citedy By: 62 Climate Change and Climate Variability: Adaptations to Reduce Adverse Health Impacts Author: AnthonyJ.McMichael,R.SariKovats, Journal: Environmental Monitoring and Assessment,Vol.61(1),2000--Pages Abstract: Global climate change is likely to have a range of consequences for human health as a result of disturbance or weakening of the biosphere's natural or human-managed life support systems. The full range of potential human health impacts of global climate change is diverse and would be distributed differentially spatially and over time. Changes in the mortality toll of heatwaves and changes in the distribution of vector-borne infectious diseases may occur early. The public health consequences of sea level rise and of regional changes in agricultural productivity may not occur (or become apparent) for several decades. Vulnerability is a measure of both sensitivity to climate change and the ability to adapt in anticipation of, or in response to, its impacts. The basic modes of adaptation to climate-induced health hazards are biological, behavioural and social. Adaptation can be undertaken at the individual, community and whole-population levels. Adaptive strategies should not introduce new health hazards. Enhancement of the acknowledged public health infrastructure and intervention programmes is essential to reduce vulnerability to the health impacts of climate change. In the longer-term, fundamental improvements in the social and material conditions of life and in the reduction of inequalities within and between populations are required for sustained reduction in vulnerability to environmental health hazards. Keywords: climate changeEl Nio Southern Oscillationpublic healthadaptationprimary prevention Citedy By: 59 Modeling Vulnerability and Resilience to Climate Change: A Case Study of India and Indian States Author: AntoinetteL.Brenkert, ElizabethL.Malone Journal: Climatic Change,Vol.72(1-2),2005--Pages Abstract: The vulnerability of India and Indian states to climate change was assessed using the Vulnerability-Resilience Indicator Prototype (VRIP). The model was adapted from the global/country version to account for Indian dietary practices and data availability with regard to freshwater resources. Results (scaled to world values) show nine Indian states to be moderately resilient to climate change, principally because of low sulfur emissions and a relatively large percentage of unmanaged land. Six states are more vulnerable than India as a whole, attributable largely to sensitivity to sea storm surges. Analyses of results at the state level (Orissa, and comparisons between Maharashtra and Kerala, and Andhra Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh) demonstrate the value of VRIP analyses used in conjunction with other socio-economic information to address initial questions about the sources of vulnerability in particular places. The modeling framework allows analysts and stakeholders to systematically evaluate individual and sets of indicators and to indicate where the likely vulnerabilities are in the area being assessed. Keywords: Citedy By: 206 Climate change risk: an adaptation and mitigation agenda for Indian cities Author: Aromer Revi Journal: Environment and Urbanization,Vol.20(1),2008--Pages Abstract: This paper considers the needed adaptation and mitigation agenda for cities in India where the urban population is likely to grow by around 500 million over the next 50 years. It considers the likely changes that climate change will bring in temperature, precipitation and extreme rainfall, drought, river and inland flooding, storms/storm surges/coastal flooding, sea-level rise and environmental health risks, and who within urban populations are most at risk. It notes the importance for urban areas of an effective rural adaptation agenda especially in maintaining the productivity and functioning of rural systems. It highlights the importance of today's infrastructure investments, taking into account climate changes, given the long lifespan of most infrastructure, and the importance of urban management engaging with changing risk profiles. One important part of this is the need to connect official adaptation initiatives to the much-improved natural hazard risk assessment, management and mitigation capacity that responded to major disasters. The paper ends by describing a possible urban climate change adaptation framework, including changes needed at the national, state, city and neighbourhood levels, and linkages to mitigation Keywords: Citedy By: 251 Climate change in Nepal and its impact on Himalayan glaciers Author: ArunB.Shrestha,RajuAryal, Journal: Regional Environmental Change,Vol.11(1),2011--Pages Abstract: Climate change can be particularly hard-hitting for small underdeveloped countries, relying heavily on natural resources for the economy and livelihoods. Nepal is one among these countries, being landlocked, with diverse physiographical characteristics within a relatively small territory and with rugged terrain. Poverty is widespread and the capacity of people and the country to cope with climate change impact is low. The country is dominated by the Asian monsoon system. The main occupation is agriculture, largely based on rain-fed farming practices. Tourism based on high altitude adventures is one of the major sources of income for the country. Nepal has a large hydropower potential. While only 0.75% of the theoretical hydropower potential has been tapped, Nepal can greatly benefit from this natural resource in the future. Climate change can adversely impact upon water resources and other sectors of Nepal. The source of water is mainly summer monsoon precipitation and the melting of the large reserve of snow and glaciers in the Himalayan highlands. Observations show clear evidences of significant warming. The average trend in the country is 0.06C per year. The warming rates are progressively higher for high elevation locations. The warming climate has resulted in rapid shrinking of majority of glaciers in Nepal. This paper presents state-of-knowledge on the glacial dynamics in the country based on studies conducted in the past in Shorong, Khumbu, Langtang, Dhaulagiri and Kanchenjunga regions of Nepal. We present recent trends in river flow and an overview of studies on expected changes in the hydrological regime due to climate change. Formation, growth and likely outburst of glacial lake are phenomena directly related to climate change and deglaciation. This paper provides a synopsis of past glacial lake outburst floods impacting Nepal. Further, likely impacts of climate change on other sectors such as agriculture, biodiversity, human health and livelihoods are discussed. Keywords: HimalayasGlacial lake outburst floodGlacier fluctuationsRiver dischargeLivelihoods Citedy By: 152 Corporate environmental and climate change disclosures: Empirical evidence from Bangladesh Author: Ataur Rahman Belal,, Md. Rezaul Kabir,, Stuart Cooper,, Prasanta Dey,, Niaz Ahmed Khan,, Taiabur Rahman,, Mohobbot Ali, Journal: Research in Accounting in Emerging Economies,Vol.10(),2010--Pages Abstract: Purpose In this article, we examine the nature and the extent of corporate environmental and climate change disclosures in Bangladesh. Design/methodology/approach For this purpose, we have undertaken a content analysis of annual reports related to the year 2008 and websites of the 100 largest companies (according to market capitalization) listed on the Dhaka Stock Exchange. We have used 24 content analysis categories to capture the relevant disclosures related to climate change and other environmental issues. Findings Key findings of our analysis suggest that the level of environmental and climate change disclosures is very low in Bangladesh. Although 91% of companies made disclosures in at least one category, most companies disclosed information only on the energy usage category, which is a mandatory requirement. Even fewer companies made disclosures in the specific areas of climate change. No disclosure was made in the significant categories such as GHG emissions. The second most popular category related to climate change was adaptation measures. Among the other environmental disclosures, a significant finding is that only 5% of (website 6%) companies disclosed that they had an effluent treatment plant. Closer examination of the nature of disclosures suggests that most of the disclosures are positive and descriptive in nature. Originality/value As far as we are aware, this is the first study of its kind in Bangladesh which systematically examines corporate climate change disclosures as a particular focus of researc Keywords: Corporate environmental disclosures,climate change disclosures,developing countries,Bangladesh Citedy By: 18 Enhanced temperature variability in high-altitude climate change Author: AtsumuOhmura, Journal: Theoretical and Applied Climatology,Vol.110(4),2012--Pages Abstract: In the present article, monthly mean temperature at 56 stations assembled in 18 regional groups in 10 major mountain ranges of the world were investigated. The periods of the analysis covered the last 50 to 110years. The author found that the variability of temperature in climatic time scale tends to increase with altitude in about 65% of the regional groups. A smaller number of groups, 20%, showed the fastest change at an intermediate altitude between the peaks (or ridges) and their foot, while the remaining small number of sites, 15%, showed the largest trends at the foot of mountains. This tendency provides a useful base for considering and planning the climate impact evaluations. The reason for the amplification of temperature variation at high altitudes is traced back to the increasing diabatic processes in the mid- and high troposphere as a result of the cloud condensation. This situation results from the fact that the radiation balance at the earths surface is transformed more efficiently into latent heat of evaporation rather than sensible heat, the ratio between them being 4 to 1. Variation in the surface evaporation is converted into heat upon condensation into cloud particles and ice crystals in the mid- and high troposphere. Therefore, this is the altitude where the result of the surface radiation change is effectively transferred. Further, the low temperature of the environment amplifies the effect of the energy balance variation on the surface temperature, as a result of the functional shape of StefanBoltzmann law. These processes altogether contribute to enhancing temperature variability at high altitudes. The altitude playsan important role in determining the temperature variability, besides other important factors such as topography, surface characteristics, cryosphere/temperature feedback and the frequency and intensity of an inversion. These processes have a profound effect not only on the ecosystem but also on glaciers and permafrost. Keywords: Citedy By: 42 Dynamical downscaling of climate change in Central Asia Author: B Mannig, M Mller, E Starke, C Merkenschlager Journal: Global and Planetary Change ,Vol.110(1),2013--Pages Abstract: The high-resolution regional climate model (RCM) REMO has been implemented over the region of Central Asia, including western China. A model run forced by reanalysis data (1/2 resolution), and two runs forced by a GCM (one run with 1/2 and one run with 1/6 resolution) have been realized. The model has been evaluated regarding its ability to simulate the mean climate of the period 19712000. It has been found that the spatial pattern of mean temperature and precipitation is simulated well by REMO. The REMO simulations are often closer to observational data than reanalysis data are, and show considerably higher spatial detail. The GCM-forced simulations extend to the year 2100 under the A1B scenario. The climate change signal of temperature is largest in winter in the northern part of the study area and over mountainous terrain. A warming up to 7C is projected until the end of the 21st century. In summer, warming is strongest over the southern part of Central Asia. Changes in precipitation are spatially more heterogeneous. Keywords: climate change regional climate modeling Central Asia Citedy By: 42 Climate Change, Adaptive Capacity and Development Author: B Smit, O Pilifosova Journal: Climatic Change,Vol.(),2013--Pages Abstract: The Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has presented strong evidence that human-induced climate change is occurring and that all countries of the world will be affected and need to adapt to impacts. The IPCC points out that many developing countries are particularly vulnerable because of their relatively low adaptive capacity. Therefore it is seen as a development priority to help these countries enhance their adaptive capacity to climate change. The Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and Stratus Consulting organized a workshop in the fall of 2001 to develop an agenda for research on how best to enhance the capacity of developing countries to adapt to climate change. This research agenda is relevant for governments and institutions that wish to support developing countries in adapting to climate change. The workshop brought together experts from developing and industrialized countries, non-governmental organizations, and multilateral and bilateral donor organizations to discuss a number of important topics related to adaptation, adaptive capacity and sustainable development. A dozen papers were commissioned to cover these topics, both from a theoretical perspective and in the form of national case studies. The papers form the basis for this important book, which presents the latest interdisciplinary knowledge about the nature and components of adaptive capacity and how it may be strengthened. Sample Chapter(s) Keywords: Citedy By: 384 Equity in climate change : the great divide Author: Benito Mller Journal: Equity in climate change,Vol.(),2002--Pages Abstract: There is a strongly held view in the policy analysis community and beyond that developing countries will play a significant role in determining the success of the multilateral climate change regime under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC). It is equally widely understood that, consequently, success will not be forthcoming unless the key concerns of these countries - particularly those pertaining to inequities - are sufficiently taken into account in the future development of the regime. In Diagnosing the Divide, this study detects a clear North-South Divide in the views on the nature of the paramount climate change equity problem. In the Northern hemisphere, where the relevant discussion is spearheaded by non-government stakeholders (academic, EGO), it is regarded to be the issue of allocating emission mitigation targets; in the South, the concern - reflected by many governments - is above all about the discrepancy between the responsibility for, and the sharing of climate impact burdens.Acknowledging the importance for the global climate change regime to continue its efforts in avoiding and limiting future anthropogenic climate-related disasters, the second part of this study (Bridging the Divide: Redressing The Balance) argues that we have passed the point where complete avoidance could have been assured, and that consequently the regime must face up to this inevitability and begin to prepare appropriate impact/disaster response measures. Given the existing threat, particular urgency is attached to a proposal for reform of the relevant disasterrelieffunding mechanism by creating an FCCCClimate Impact Relief(CIR)Fundto achieve an international relief system adequate to the challenge. Because this is to involve merely a more efficient funding mode, such a reform could be carried out with little or no additional costs (no new money), yet with significant benefits to the international community. Keywords: Citedy By: 123 Tropical climate change recorded by a glacier in the central Andes during the last decades of the twentieth century: Chacaltaya, Bolivia, 16S Author: Bernard Francou, Mathias Vuille, Patrick Wagnon, Javier Mendoza, Jean-Emmanuel Sicart Journal: Journal of Geological Research,Vol.108(D5),2003--Pages Abstract: The reasons for the accelerated glacier retreat observed since the early 1980s in the tropical Andes are analyzed based on the well-documented Chacaltaya glacier (Bolivia). Monthly mass balance measurements available over the entire 19912001 decade are interpreted in the light of a recent energy balance study performed on nearby Zongo glacier and further put into a larger-scale context by analyzing the relationship with ocean-atmosphere dynamics over the tropical Pacific-South American domain. The strong interannual variability observed in the mass balance is mainly dependent on variations in ablation rates during the austral summer months, in particular during DJF. Since high humidity levels during the summer allow melting to be distinctly predominant over sublimation, net all-wave radiation, via albedo and incoming long-wave radiation, is the main factor that governs ablation. Albedo depends on snowfall and a deficit during the transition period and in the core of the wet season (DJF) maintains low albedo surfaces of bare ice, which in turn leads to enhanced absorption of solar radiation and thus to increased melt rates. On a larger spatial scale, interannual glacier evolution is predominantly controlled by sea surface temperature anomalies (SSTA) in the eastern equatorial Pacific (Nio 1+2 region). The glacier mass balance is influenced by tropical Pacific SSTA primarily through changes in precipitation, which is significantly reduced during El Nio events. The more frequent occurrence of El Nio events and changes in the characteristics of its evolution, combined with an increase of near-surface temperature in the Andes, are identified as the main factors responsible for the accelerated retreat of Chacaltaya glacier. Keywords: Citedy By: 249 Future of wetlands in tropical and subtropical Asia, especially in the face of climate change Author: BrijGopal Journal: Aquatic Sciences,Vol.75(1),2013--Pages Abstract: Tropical and subtropical Asia differs from other tropical regions in its monsoonal climate and the dominant influence of the Hindukush and Himalayan mountain ranges which result in extremes of spatial and temporal variability in precipitation. However, several major rivers and their tributaries arise in the Himalayan ranges and are fed by thousands of glaciers. Huge sediment loads carried by these rivers result in important deltas at their mouths. The climatic and physiographic diversity have endowed the region with many kinds of wetlands. Of these, the peatswamps of southeast Asia constitute about 56% of the worlds tropical peatlands, and more than 42% of the worlds mangroves occur in South and southeast Asia. Among other wetlands, riverine swamps are rather restricted whereas the seasonal marshes are a dominant feature. Another characteristic feature of tropical Asia are the innumerable human-made and intensively managed wetlands of which the paddy fields and aquaculture ponds are the most extensive. Throughout tropical Asia, wetlands have been a part of the socio-cultural ethos of the people and many communities have lived in wetlands. However, the pressures of high population and the economic development have extensively impacted upon wetlands which have been transformed for paddy cultivation and aquaculture, drained and converted to other land uses for economic gains (e.g., conversion to oil palm), and degraded by discharge of domestic and industrial wastes. Invasive plant and animal species have also played a significant role. The climate change is already being felt in the rapid retreat of Himalayan glaciers, increased temperature and variability in precipitation as well as the frequency of extreme events. Sea level rise is seen as a major threat to the coastal wetlands, particularly the mangroves. Increasing droughts have caused frequent fires in Indonesian peat swamps that have further feedback impacts on regional climate. However, the actual threat to wetlands in this region arises from the extensive hydrological alterations being caused by storage, abstraction and diversion of river flows for agriculture, industry and hydropower. Currently, the state of our understanding wetlands in general, and the efforts and infrastructure for research and training in wetlands are very poor. Although a few wetlands have been designated as Ramsar sites, the policies aimed at wetland conservation are either non-existent or very weak. Human responses to greater uncertainty and variability in the available water resources in different parts of Asia will be crucial to the conservation of wetlands in the future. Keywords: Wetlands,Mangroves,Water resources,Glacier retreat,Sea level rise,Peat swamps,FireWetl, policyRamsar sites Citedy By: 40 Assessing Climate Change Impacts on Global Hydropower Author: Byman Hamududuand Aanund Killingtveit Journal: Energies, 2012,Vol.5(2),2012--Pages Abstract: Currently, hydropower accounts for close to 16% of the worlds total power supply and is the worlds most dominant (86%) source of renewable electrical energy. The key resource for hydropower generation is runoff, which is dependent on precipitation. The future global climate is uncertain and thus poses some risk for the hydropower generation sector. The crucial question and challenge then is what will be the impact of climate change on global hydropower generation and what are the resulting regional variations in hydropower generation potential? This paper is a study that aims to evaluate the changes in global hydropower generation resulting from predicted changes in climate. The study uses an ensemble of simulations of regional patterns of changes in runoff, computed from global circulation models (GCM) simulations with 12 different models. Based on these runoff changes, hydropower generation is estimated by relating the runoff changes to hydropower generation potential through geographical information system (GIS), based on 2005 hydropower generation. Hydropower data obtained from EIA (energy generation), national sites, FAO (water resources) and UNEP were used in the analysis. The countries/states were used as computational units to reduce the complexities of the analysis. The results indicate that there are large variations of changes (increases/decreases) in hydropower generation across regions and even within regions. Globally, hydropower generation is predicted to change very little by the year 2050 for the hydropower system in operation today. This change amounts to an increase of less than 1% of the current (2005) generation level although it is necessary to carry out basin level detailed assessment for local impacts which may differ from the country based values. There are many regions where runoff and hydropower generation will increase due to increasing precipitation, but also many regions where there will be a decrease. Based on this evaluation, it has been concluded that even if individual countries and regions may experience significant impacts, climate change will not lead to significant changes in the global hydropower generation, at least for the existing hydropower system. Keywords: climate change; global; water resources; hydropower generation Citedy By: 74 Crisis or adaptation? Migration and climate change in a context of high mobility Author: C Tacoli Journal: Environment and urbanization,Vol.21(2),2009--Pages Abstract: The impacts of climate change are likely to affect population distribution and mobility. While alarmist predictions of massive flows of refugees are not supported by past experiences of responses to droughts and extreme weather events, predictions for future migration flows are tentative at best. What we do know is that mobility and migration are key responses to environmental and non-environmental transformations and pressures. They should therefore be a central element of strategies of adaptation to climate change. This requires a radical change in policy makers perceptions of migration as a problem and a better understanding of the role of local and national institutions in supporting and accommodating mobility. Keywords: Citedy By: 365 Implications of climate change for the fishes of the British Isles Author: C. T. Graham,C. Harrod, Journal: Journal of Fish Biology,Vol.74(6),2009--Pages Abstract: Recent climatic change has been recorded across the globe. Although environmental change is a characteristic feature of life on Earth and has played a major role in the evolution and global distribution of biodiversity, predicted future rates of climatic change, especially in temperature, are such that they will exceed any that has occurred over recent geological time. Climate change is considered as a key threat to biodiversity and to the structure and function of ecosystems that may already be subject to significant anthropogenic stress. The current understanding of climate change and its likely consequences for the fishes of Britain and Ireland and the surrounding seas are reviewed through a series of case studies detailing the likely response of several marine, diadromous and freshwater fishes to climate change. Changes in climate, and in particular, temperature have and will continue to affect fish at all levels of biological organization: cellular, individual, population, species, community and ecosystem, influencing physiological and ecological processes in a number of direct, indirect and complex ways. The response of fishes and of other aquatic taxa will vary according to their tolerances and life stage and are complex and difficult to predict. Fishes may respond directly to climate-change-related shifts in environmental processes or indirectly to other influences, such as community-level interactions with other taxa. However, the ability to adapt to the predicted changes in climate will vary between species and between habitats and there will be winners and losers. In marine habitats, recent changes in fish community structure will continue as fishes shift their distributions relative to their temperature preferences. This may lead to the loss of some economically important cold-adapted species such asGadus morhuaandClupea harengusfrom some areas around Britain and Ireland, and the establishment of some new, warm-adapted species. Increased temperatures are likely to favour cool-adapted (e.g. Perca fluviatilis) and warm-adapted freshwater fishes (e.g.roachRutilus rutilusand other cyprinids) whose distribution and reproductive success may currently be constrained by temperature rather than by cold-adapted species (e.g.salmonids). Species that occur in Britain and Ireland that are at the edge of their distribution will be most affected, both negatively and positively. Populations of conservation importance (e.g.Salvelinus alpinusandCoregonusspp.) may decline irreversibly. However, changes in food-web dynamics and physiological adaptation, for example because of climate change, may obscure or alter predicted responses. The residual inertia in climate systems is such that even a complete cessation in emissions would still leave fishes exposed to continued climate change for at least half a century. Hence, regardless of the success or failure of programmes aimed at curbing climate change, major changes in fish communities can be expected over the next 50 years with a concomitant need to adapt management strategies accordingly Keywords: Citedy By: 190 The use of crop models for international climate change impact assessment Author: C.Rosenzweig,A.Iglesias, Journal: Understanding options for agricultural Production,Vol.7(),1998--Pages Abstract: The methodology for an assessment of potential impacts of climate change on world crop production, including quantitative estimates of yield and water-use changes for major crops, is described. Agricultural scientists in 18 countries estimated potential changes in crop growth and water use using compatible crop models and consistent climate change scenarios. The crops modeled were wheat, rice, maize and soybean. Site-specific estimates of yield changes for the major crops modeled were aggregated to national levels for use in a world food trade model, the Basic Linked System. The study assessed the implications of climate change for world crop yields for arbitrary and GCM equilibrium and transient climate change scenarios. The climate change scenarios were tested with and without the direct physiological effects of CO2on crop growth and water use, as reported in experimental literature. Climate change impacts on crop yields incorporating farm-level adaptation were also simulated, based on different assumptions about shifts in crop planting dates, changes in crop variety, and level of irrigation. Keywords: Key words climate changeworld food supplycrop modeladaptation Citedy By: 97 Coming Clean: The Impact of Environmental Performance and Visibility on Corporate Climate Change Disclosure Author: CedricDawkins,JohnW.Fraas, Journal: Journal of Business Ethics,Vol.100(2),2011--Pages Abstract: Previous research provides mixed results on the relationship between corporate environmental performance and the level of voluntary environmental disclosure. We revisit this relation by testing competing predictions from defensive and accommodative approaches to voluntary disclosure with regard to climate change. In particular, we add to the prior literature by determining the extent to which environmental performance and company media visibility interact to prompt voluntary climate change disclosure. Using ordinal regression and Ceres, KLD, and Trucost ratings of S&P 500 companies, we find a positive relationship between environmental performance and voluntary climate change disclosure. We extend the literature on environmental strategies and disclosure by establishing that company visibility and issue (climate change) visibility interact with environmental perfor- mance to influence the level of voluntary climate change disclosure. Keywords: voluntary environmental disclosuretransparency in organizationsenvironmental sustainabilityenvironmental strategysocial responsibility of businessmedia coverage of business Citedy By: 108 Businesses, Green Groups and The Media: The Role of Non-Governmental Organizations in the Climate Change Debate Author: Chad Carpenter Journal: International Affairs,Vol.77(2),2001--Pages Abstract: The lion's share of media and governmental commentary on the recent Sixth Conference of the Parties (COP-6) to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change has focused on rifts between the EU and the Umbrella Group of countries, including the United States, Canada and Japan, and has led many observers to speculate that intergovernmental negotiations on climate change may have irretrievably broken down. Limiting the focus solely to political difficulties with specific issues, however, emphasizes only part of the story and takes no account of the complex context in which the international negotiations are embedded. This approach does not give sufficient credit to the growing momentum gathering outside the negotiating halls. This article examines recent and rapid changes in attitude and awareness among non-governmental groups-including business and industry, environmental groups and the media-on the issue of global climate change, and the impact these changes have had on the negotiating process and the overall climate change debate. Together these groups provide encouraging signs of a shift in public opinion and ample proof that the failure of the talks in The Hague does not signal the end of the road. Keywords: Citedy By: 129 Roles of European blocking and tropical-extratropical interaction in the 2010 Pakistan flooding Author: Chi-Cherng Hong,Huang-Hsiung Hsu, Nai-Hsin Lin,Hsun Chiu, Journal: Geophysical Research Letters,Vol.38(13),2011--Pages Abstract: [1]A sequence of monsoon surges struck Pakistan and Northwestern India during late July-early August 2010. The unusually heavy monsoon rainfall resulted in record-breaking floods, which affected 20 million people with a death toll of near 3000. Simultaneously, a long-lived blocking high appeared over Europe and Russia in middle June and persisted for nearly two months. Extreme flooding occurred when the southward penetration of extratropical potential vorticity in the deep trough east of the European blocking and the tropical monsoon surges arrived concurrently in Pakistan. This study demonstrates that the interaction between the tropical monsoon surges and the extratropical disturbances downstream of the European blocking was the key factor leading to the severe flooding in Pakistan. The 2010 La Nia condition contributed indirectly to the flooding by inducing a low-level easterly anomaly in South and Southeast Asia, which weakened eastward moisture transport and helped enhance moisture transport (convergence) to (in) the Northern Arabian Sea and Pakistan. Keywords: Citedy By: 82 Climate change, sea level rise and rice: global market implications Author: Chi-ChungChen, BruceMcCarl, Ching-ChengChang, Journal: Climatic Change,Vol.110(3-4),2012--Pages Abstract: Climate change will influence yields while sea level rise can inundate producing lands. The research reported investigates the individual and simultaneous effects of these factors on production, trade and consumption of rice the worlds number one food crop. A global rice trade model is utilized to do this. The results indicate that the combination of yield and sea level effects causes a significant reduction in production and an increase in rice prices which may have important policy implications for food security. Global rice production is reduced by 1.60% to 2.73% while global rice price increases by 7.14% to 12.77%. Sea level rise is particularly a risk factor in Bangladesh, Japan, Taiwan, Egypt, Myanmar and Vietnam. In the face of such developments, adaptation may well be desirable and thus an investigation is done over adaptation options of increased technical progress or trade liberalization with the results showing that both can mitigate such damages. Keywords: Citedy By: 29 Climate Change, Vulnerability, and Responsibility Author: Chris J. Cuomo, Journal: Hypatia,,Vol.26(4),2011--Pages Abstract: In this essay I present an overview of the problem of climate change, with attention to issues of interest to feminists, such as the differential responsibilities of nations and the disproportionate vulnerabilities of females, people of color, and the economically disadvantaged in relation to climate change. I agree with others that justice requires governments, corporations, and individuals to take full responsibility for histories of pollution, and for present and future greenhouse gas emissions. Nonetheless I worry that an overemphasis on household and personal-sphere fossil fuel emissions distracts from attention to higher-level corporate and governmental responsibilities for addressing the problem of climate change. I argue that more attention should be placed on the higher-level responsibilities of corporations and governments, and I discuss how individuals might more effectively take responsibility for addressing global climate change, especially when corporations and governments refuse to do so. Keywords: Citedy By: 64 Climate change and evolving human diversity in Europe during the last glacial Author: CliveGamble,WilliamDavies,PaulPettitt,MartinRichards Journal: Royal Society ,Vol.359(1442),2004--Pages Abstract: A link between climate change and human evolution during the Pleistocene has often been assumed but rarely tested. At the macroevolutionary level Foley showed for hominids that extinction, rather than speciation, correlates with environmental change as recorded in the deep sea record. Our aim is to examine this finding at a smaller scale and with highresolution environmental and archaeological archives. Our interest is in changing patterns of human dispersal under shifting Pleistocene climates during the last glacial period in Europe. Selecting this time frame and region allows us to observe how two hominid taxa, Neanderthals and CrMagnons, adapted to climatic conditions during oxygen isotope stage 3. These taxa are representative of two hominid adaptive radiations, termedterrestrialandaquatic, which exhibited different habitat preferences but similar tolerances to climatic factors. Their response to changing ecological conditions was predicated upon their ability to extend their societies in space and time. We examine this difference further using a database of all available radiocarbon determinations from western Europe in the late glacial. These data act as proxies for population history, and in particular the expansion and contraction of regional populations as climate changed rapidly. Independent assessment of these processes is obtained from the genetic history of Europeans. The results indicate that climate affects population contraction rather than expansion. We discuss the consequences for genetic and cultural diversity which led to the legacy of the Ice Age: a single hominid species, globally distributed. Keywords: Citedy By: 223 Simultaneously Mitigating Near-Term Climate Change and Improving Human Health and Food Security Author: D Shindell, JCI Kuylenstierna, E Vignati Journal: Science.science mag,Vol.335(6065),2012--Pages Abstract: opospheric ozone and black carbon (BC) contribute to both degraded air quality and global warming. We considered ~400 emission control measures to reduce these pollutants by using current technology and experience. We identified 14 measures targeting methane and BC emissions that reduce projected global mean warming ~0.5C by 2050. This strategy avoids 0.7 to 4.7 million annual premature deaths from outdoor air pollution and increases annual crop yields by 30 to 135 million metric tons due to ozone reductions in 2030 and beyond. Benefits of methane emissions reductions are valued at $700 to $5000 per metric ton, which is well above typical marginal abatement costs (less than $250). The selected controls target different sources and influence climate on shorter time scales than those of carbon dioxidereduction measures. Implementing both substantially reduces the risks of crossing the 2C threshold. Keywords: Citedy By: 614 Climate change: Can wheat beat the heat? Author: D Shindell, JCI Kuylenstierna, E Vignati Journal: Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment,Vol.26(1-2),2008--Pages Abstract: Climate change could strongly affect the wheat crop that accounts for 21% of food and 200 million hectares of farmland worldwide. This article reviews some of the approaches for addressing the expected effects that climate change may likely inflict on wheat in some of the most important wheat growing areas, namely germplasm adaptation, system management, and mitigation. Future climate scenarios suggest that global warming may be beneficial for the wheat crop in some regions, but could reduce productivity in zones where optimal temperatures already exist. For example, by 2050, as a result of possible climate shifts in the Indo-Gangetic Plains (IGPs) currently part of the favorable, high potential, irrigated, low rainfall mega-environment, which accounts for 15% of global wheat production as much as 51% of its area might be reclassified as a heat-stressed, irrigated, short-season production mega-environment. This shift would also represent a significant reduction in wheat yields, unless appropriate cultivars and crop management practices were offered to and adopted by South Asian farmers. Under the same climate scenarios, the area covered by the cool, temperate wheat mega-environment could expand as far as 65N in both North America and Eurasia. To adapt and mitigate the climate change effects on wheat supplies for the poor, germplasm scientists and agronomists are developing heat-tolerant wheat germplasm, as well as cultivars better adapted to conservation agriculture. Encouraging results include identifying sources of alleles for heat tolerance and their introgression into breeding populations through conventional methods and biotechnology. Likewise, agronomists and extension agents are aiming to cut CO2emissions by reducing tillage and the burning of crop residues. Mitigation research promises to reduce emissions of nitrous oxide by using infrared sensors and the normalized differential vegetative index (NDVI) that determines the right times and correct amounts of fertilizer to apply. Wheat geneticists and physiologists are also assessing wild relatives of wheat as potential sources of genes with inhibitory effects on soil nitrification. Through the existing global and regional research-for-development networks featuring wheat, technology and knowledge can flow to allow farmers to face the risks associated with climate change. Keywords: Triticum aestivum Climate change Conservation agriculture Genetic enhancement Mega-environment Wheat Citedy By: 430 Climate change and the potential distribution of an invasive alien plant:Acacia niloticassp.indicain Australia Author: D. J. Kriticos, R. W. Sutherst, J. R. Brown,S. W. Adkins,G. F. Maywald Journal: Journal of Applied Ecology,Vol.40(1),2003--Pages Abstract: Acacia niloticais a spinescent woody legume that has become highly invasive in several parts of the world, including Australia where it has been declared a weed of national significance. Understanding the likely potential distribution of this notorious plant under current and future climate scenarios will enable policy makers and land managers to prepare appropriate strategies to manage the invasion. CLIMEX was used to synthesize available information from diverse sources to model the invasion potential ofA. niloticaand gain insights into the climatic factors limiting its range expansion. The model identified areas at risk of further invasion so that early preventative or ameliorative measures could be undertaken in a timely manner.The potential distribution ofA. niloticain Australia under current climatic conditions is vast, and far greater than the current distribution.Global climate change is likely to increase markedly the potential distribution ofA. niloticain Australia, significantly increasing the area at risk of invasion. The factors of most importance are the expected increases in water-use efficiency ofA. niloticadue to increased atmospheric CO2concentrations, allowing it to invade more xeric sites further inland, and increased temperatures, allowing it to complete its reproductive life cycle further southward (poleward).Synthesis and applications.Simple paddock quarantine procedures may provide a means of limiting the range ofA. niloticawithin its potential distribution under current, as well as future, climate scenarios. The projected increased growth potential ofA.niloticathroughout its current range suggests that if future management patterns result in seed pods lying unconsumed on the ground, heightened vigilance may be required to identify and eradicate new invasion foci arising from flood dispersal. The increased growth potential may also result in an alteration of the economic balance, in favour of harvestingA. niloticafor agroforestry or local bioenergy projects. A crucial component in containing this invasion will be raising public awareness of the invasion threat posed byA. nilotica, its identification and suitable control techniques. Keywords: Citedy By: 282 Damage costs of climate change through intensification of tropical cyclone activities: an application of FUND Author: Daiju Narita, Richard S. J. Tol and David Anthoff Journal: Climate Research,Vol.39(2),2009--Pages Abstract: Climate change may intensify tropical cyclone activities and amplify their negative economic effects. We simulated the direct economic impact of tropical cyclones enhanced by climate change with the integrated assessment model Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation and Distribution (FUND), Version 3.4. The results show that in the basic case (parameter levels based on intermediate estimates), the direct economic damage caused by tropical cyclones ascribed to the effect of climate change would amount to US$19 billion globally in the year 2100 (almost the same level as the baseline, i.e. current global damage of tropical cyclones), while the ratio to world gross domestic product (GDP) would be 0.006%. The USA and China account for much of the absolute damage, whereas Small Island States incur the largest damage if evaluated as the proportion of GDP. Model results were sensitive to the choice of baseline and of the wind-speed elasticity of storm damage. Keywords: Citedy By: 49 Quantifying Vulnerability to Climate Change: Implications for Adaptation Assistance Author: David Wheeler, Journal: Quantifying Vulnerability to Climate Change: Implications for Adaptation Assistance ,Vol.(),2011--Pages Abstract: This paper attempts a comprehensive accounting of climate change vulnerability for 233 states, ranging in size from China to Tokelau. Using the most recent evidence, it develops risk indicators for three critical problems: increasing weather-related disasters, sea-level rise, and loss of agricultural productivity. The paper embeds these indicators in a methodology for cost-effective allocation of adaptation assistance. The methodology can be applied easily and consistently to all 233 states and all three problems, or to any subset that may be of interest to particular donors. Institutional perspectives and priorities differ; the paper develops resource allocation formulas for three cases: (1) potential climate impacts alone, as measured by the three indicators; (2) case 1 adjusted for differential country vulnerability, which is affected by economic development and governance; and (3) case 2 adjusted for donor concerns related to project economics: intercountry differences in project unit costs and probabilities of project success. The paper is accompanied by an Excel database with complete data for all 233 countries. It provides two illustrative applications of the database and methodology: assistance for adaptation to sea level rise by the 20 island states that are both small and poor and general assistance to all low-income countries for adaptation to extreme weather changes, sea-level rise, and agricultural productivity loss. Keywords: Climate change, vulnerability, risk indicators, weather-related disasters, sea-level rise, loss of agricultural productivity Citedy By: 129 Mapping the Resilience of International River Basins to Future Climate Change-Induced Water Variability, Volume 1. Main Report Author: De Stefano, Lucia, Duncan, James, Dinar, Shlomi, Stahl, Kerstin, Strzepek, Kenneth, Wolf, Aaron T Journal: Mapping the Resilience of International River Basins to Future Climate Change-Induced Water Variability, Volume 1. Main Repo,Vol.1(),2010--Pages Abstract: The study presented in this report aims to increase our understanding of the global distribution of treaty and River Basin Organization (RBO) mechanisms that may confer resilience to variability in the hydrological regime and how that distribution aligns with current and anticipated regimes. Some basins will experience greater changes in hydrologic variability regimes than others, and we specifically seek to identify country-basin combinations with greater exposure to variability and few or no treaty/RBO provisions to manage the transboundary impacts of that variability. To do this, we assessed all available international water treaties for specific treaty mechanisms, mapped the spatial distribution of these mechanisms and RBOs, and compared it to both the current variability regime and projections of future variability regimes driven by climate change. We then identified specific basins that may merit further study in light of their potential risk of future hydropolitical stress. By identifying these areas at the global scale, we can contribute to efforts aimed at anticipating future challenges in transboundary water management and suggesting specific measures to adapt existing or new water agreements to the effects of climate change. Keywords: Citedy By: 40 Uplift-driven climate change at 12 Ma: a long d18O record from the NE margin of the Tibetan plateau Author: DL Dettman, X Fang,CN Garzione, J Li Journal: Earth and Planetary Science Letters,Vol.214(1-2),2003--Pages Abstract: Carbonates from fluvial and lacustrine sediments were sampled from multiple measured sections in the Linxia basin of western China. Based on textural and mineralogical evidence, lacustrine carbonates are primary precipitates from lake water. A 29 million year record of the oxygen isotope composition of meteoric water is inferred from the d18O values of these carbonates. This inference is based on the most negative d18O values in the lake carbonates, which represent lake waters that have experienced the least evaporative enrichment. Carbonate d18O values, a proxy for rainfall d18O, are ~-10.5 throughout the interval of 2912 Ma. At 12 Ma there is a shift to -9, a value that remains into the Pliocene. This implies a major reorganization of atmospheric circulation patterns and a shift to more arid conditions at the NE margin of the Tibetan plateau with the post-12 Ma system similar to that of today. The 12 Ma event may represent the time at which the Tibetan plateau achieves sufficient elevation to block the penetration of moisture from the Indian Ocean or south Pacific into western China. The period of greatest aridity is from 9.6 to 8.2 Ma, a time interval which agrees well with other climate records. Keywords: Tibetan plateau uplift oxygen isotopes lacustrine Miocene Citedy By: 188 Migration and climate change: examining thresholds of change to guide effective adaptation decision-making Author: DouglasK.Bardsley, GraemeJ.Hugo, Journal: Population and Environment,Vol.32(2-3),2010--Pages Abstract: The implications of environmental change for migration are little understood. Migration as a response to climate change could be seen as a failure of in situ adaptation methods, or migration could be alternatively perceived as a rational component of creative adaptation to environmental risk. This paper frames migration as part of an adaptation response to climate change impacts to natural resource condition and environmental hazards. Thresholds will be reached by communities after which migration will become a vital component of an effective adaptation response. Such changes to migration patterns have the potential to undermine migration policy unless appropriate preparations are undertaken. This paper describes an approach to assist researchers to frame how climate change will influence migration by critically analysing how thresholds of fundamental change to migration patterns could be identified, primarily in relation to two case studies in Nepal and Thailand. Future policy for internal and international migration could be guided by the analysis of such thresholds of non-linear migration and resourced effectively to ensure that socio-economic and humanitarian outcomes are maximised. Keywords: MigrationClimate changeAdaptationThresholdsEnvironmental riskNepalThailand Citedy By: 138 Phenologically-Tuned MODIS NDVI-Based Time Series (2000-2012) For Monitoring Of Vegetation and Climate Change in North-Eastern Punjab, Pakistan Author: Dr. Farooq Ahmad, Journal: Global Journal of Human-Social Science,Vol.17(),2001--Pages Abstract: One of the main factors determining the daily variation of the active surface temperature is the state of the vegetation cover. It can well be characterized by the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). The NDVI has the potential ability to signal the vegetation features of different eco-regions and provides valuable information as a remote sensing tool in studying vegetation phenology cycles. The vegetation phenology is the expression of the seasonal cycles of plant processes and contributes vital current information on vegetation conditions and their connections to climate change. The NDVI is computed using near-infrared and red reflectances, and thus has both an accuracy and precision. A gapless time series of MODIS NDVI (MOD13A1) composite raster data from 18th February, 2000 to 16th November, 2012 with a spatial resolution of 500 m was utilized. Time-series terrestrial parameters derived from NDVI have been extensively applied to global climate change, since it analyzes each pixel individually without the setting of thresholds to detect change within a time series Keywords: Citedy By: 14 Climate Change and Rising Heat: Population Health Implications for Working People in Australia Author: EG Hanna, T Kjellstrom, C Bennett - Journal: Asia Pacific Journal of public Health,Vol.23(2),2011--Pages Abstract: The rapid rise in extreme heat events in Australia recently is already taking a health toll. Climate change scenarios predict increases in the frequency and intensity of extreme heat events in the future, and population health may be significantly compromised for people who cannot reduce their heat exposure. Exposure to extreme heat presents a health hazard to all who are physically active, particularly outdoor workers and indoor workers with minimal access to cooling systems while working. At air temperatures close to (or beyond) the core body temperature of 37C, body cooling via sweating is essential, and this mechanism is hampered by high air humidity. Heat exposure among elite athletes and the military has been investigated, whereas the impacts on workers remain largely unexplored, particularly in relation to future climate change. Workers span all age groups and diverse levels of fitness and health status, including people with higher than normal sensitivity to heat. In a hotter world, workers are likely to experience more heat stress and find it increasingly difficult to maintain productivity. Modeling of future climate change in Australia shows a substantial increase in the number of very hot days (>35C) across the country. In this article, the authors characterize the health risks associated with heat exposure on working people and discuss future exposure risks as temperatures rise. Progress toward developing occupational health and safety guidelines for heat in Australia are summarized. Keywords: Citedy By: 79 Vulnerability of national economies to the impacts of climate change on fisheries Author: EH Allison, AL Perry, MC Badjeck Journal: Fish and Fisheries ,Vol.10(2),2009--Pages Abstract: Anthropogenic global warming has significantly influenced physical and biological processes at global and regional scales. The observed and anticipated changes in global climate present significant opportunities and challenges for societies and economies. We compare the vulnerability of 132 national economies to potential climate change impacts on their capture fisheries using an indicator-based approach. Countries in Central and Western Africa (e.g. Malawi, Guinea, Senegal, and Uganda), Peru and Colombia in north-western South America, and four tropical Asian countries (Bangladesh, Cambodia, Pakistan, and Yemen) were identified as most vulnerable. This vulnerability was due to the combined effect of predicted warming, the relative importance of fisheries to national economies and diets, and limited societal capacity to adapt to potential impacts and opportunities. Many vulnerable countries were also among the worlds least developed countries whose inhabitants are among the worlds poorest and twice as reliant on fish, which provides 27% of dietary protein compared to 13% in less vulnerable countries. These countries also produce 20% of the worlds fish exports and are in greatest need of adaptation planning to maintain or enhance the contribution that fisheries can make to poverty reduction. Although the precise impacts and direction of climate-driven change for particular fish stocks and fisheries are uncertain, our analysis suggests they are likely to lead to either increased economic hardship or missed opportunities for development in countries that depend upon fisheries but lack the capacity to adapt. Keywords: Citedy By: 641 Climate Change and the Stability of Water Allocation Agreements Author: ErikAnsink,ArjanRuijs, Journal: Environmental and Resource Economics,Vol.41(2),2008--Pages Abstract: We analyse agreements on river water allocation between riparian countries. Besides being efficient, water allocation agreements need to be stable in order to be effective in increasing the efficiency of water use. In this paper we assess the stability of water allocation agreements using a game theoretic model. We consider the effects of climate change and the choice of a sharing rule on stability. Our results show that a decrease in mean river flow decreases the stability of an agreement, while an increased variance can have a positive or a negative effect on stability. An agreement where the downstream country is allocated a fixed amount of water has the lowest stability compared to other sharing rules. These results hold for both constant and flexible non-water transfers. Keywords: Climate changeGame theoryStabilityWater allocation Citedy By: 61 The geographic distribution of dengue fever and the potential influence of global climate change Author: Esther Van KleefI, Hilary BambrickII, Simon HalesIII Journal: TropIKA.net, 2010,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: BACKGROUNDApproximately 2.5 billion people are at risk from dengue infection. Dengue is endemic to urban populations in tropical areas; large epidemics have occurred less frequently in subtropical regions, and rarely in cities in temperate regions. The virus is transmitted by the freshwater mosquito, Aedes aegypti. During the past century, surface temperatures have increased by a global average of 0.75C. Temperature increases of this magnitude may be associated with substantial increases in dengue epidemic potential.OBJECTIVEWe aimed to describe the geographic distribution of dengue transmission (current and historical) and to estimate possible impacts on transmission from climate change.METHODSWe conducted two systematic reviews. We searched PubMed, digital books and archives for literature describing geographically defined outbreaks of dengue. We also searched PubMed and Scopus for studies modelling the potential effects of climate change on dengue transmission. Data from studies meeting the inclusion criteria were considered by all of our team and we collaborated to draw our conclusions. No meta-analysis was attempted.RESULTSOne hundred and one articles met the eligibility criteria for the first review; there were some contradictions and ambiguities in the data. Current global distribution of dengue is generally less extensive than historical limits of dengue-like illness. In recent years, several countries have reported local transmission of dengue for the first time, but it is unclear whether this represents true geographic spread, rather than increased awareness and reporting. Areas of geographic contraction of dengue include the southern states of North America, much of Australia, parts of southern Europe, Japan, China and South Africa. Piped water supplies, removal of water storage tanks, changes in housing conditions and vector control measures have plausibly contributed to this contraction. Six papers met the inclusion criteria for the second review. The findings of theoretical and statistical models of dengue and climate are broadly consistent: the transmission of dengue is highly sensitive to climate. Relatively small increases in temperature (around 1C) can lead to substantial increases in transmission potential. Studies modelling the potential effects of climate change on dengue project that there will be increases in climatic suitability for transmission and an expansion of the geographic regions at risk of dengue during this century.CONCLUSIONSGeographic distribution of dengue has generally contracted, despite increases in global average temperature in the past century. Theoretically, however, temperature trends have increased the risk of dengue in some areas. The independent effect of climate change on historical patterns of dengue transmission cannot be quantified based on current evidence, as existing models of disease transmission provide limited, incomplete, projections of disease risk. The geographic limits of dengue result from a complex interaction between physical, ecological and social factors which have not been included in current climate change models. Keeping this limitation in mind, models estimating changes to geographic boundaries of transmission suggest an increase in the future population at risk of dengue. Factors associated with urban poverty and minimal capacities for surveillance and control measures remain important promoters of dengue transmission in regions with favourable climate. Keywords: Citedy By: 34 Pragmatic Approaches for Water Management Under Climate Change Uncertainty Author: Eugene Z. Stakhiv, Journal: JAWRA Journal of the American Water Resources,Vol.47(6),2011--Pages Abstract: Water resources management is in a difficult transition phase, trying to accommodate large uncertainties associated with climate change while struggling to implement a difficult set of principles and institutional changes associated with integrated water resources management. Water management is the principal medium through which projected impacts of global warming will be felt and ameliorated. Many standard hydrological practices, based on assumptions of a stationary climate, can be extended to accommodate numerous aspects of climate uncertainty. Classical engineering risk and reliability strategies developed by the water management profession to cope with contemporary climate uncertainties can also be effectively employed during this transition period, while a new family of hydrological tools and better climate change models are developed. An expansion of the concept of robust decision making, coupled with existing analytical tools and techniques, is the basis for a new approach advocated for planning and designing water resources infrastructure under climate uncertainty. Ultimately, it is not the tools and methods that need to be revamped as much as the suite of decision rules and evaluation principles used for project justification. They need to be aligned to be more compatible with the implications of a highly uncertain future climate trajectory, so that the hydrologic effects of that uncertainty are correctly reflected in the design of water infrastructure. Keywords: Citedy By: 64 Sources of uncertainty in modeling the glaciohydrological response of a Karakoram watershed to climate change Author: F. Pellicciotti,R. Bordoy,W. W. Immerzeel,S. Ragettli, Journal: Water Resources Research ,Vol.49(9),2013--Pages Abstract: In the headwater catchments of the main Asian rivers, glaciohydrological models are a useful tool to anticipate impacts of climatic changes. However, the reliability of their projections strongly depends on the quality and quantity of data that are available for parameter estimation, model calibration and validation, as well as on the accuracy of climate change projections. In this study the physically oriented, glaciohydrological model TOPKAPI-ETH is used to simulate future changes in snow, glacier, and runoff from the Hunza River Basin in northern Pakistan. Three key sources of model uncertainty in future runoff projections are compared: model parameters, climate projections, and natural climate variability. A novel approach, applicable also to ungauged catchments, is used to determine which model parameters and model components significantly affect the overall model uncertainty. We show that the model is capable of reproducing streamflow and glacier mass balances, but that all analyzed sources of uncertainty significantly affect the reliability of future projections, and that their effect is variable in time and in space. The effect of parametric uncertainty often exceeds the impact of climate uncertainty and natural climate variability, especially in heavily glacierized subcatchments. The results of the uncertainty analysis allow detailed recommendations on network design and the timing and location of field measurements, which could efficiently help to reduce model uncertainty in the future. Keywords: Citedy By: 34 Biofuels, Greenhouse Gases and Climate Change Author: FabienFerchaud,BenotGabrielle,BrunoMary,CcileBessou, Journal: Sustainable Agriculture,Vol.2(),2011--Pages Abstract: Biofuels are fuels produced from biomass, mostly in liquid form, within a time frame sufficiently short to consider that their feedstock (biomass) can be renewed, contrarily to fossil fuels. This paper reviews the current and future biofuel technologies, and their development impacts (including on the climate) within given policy and economic frameworks. Current technologies make it possible to provide first generation biodiesel, ethanol or biogas to the transport sector to be blended with fossil fuels. Still under-development 2nd generation biofuels from lignocellulose should be available on the market by 2020. Research is active on the improvement of their conversion efficiency. Aten-fold increase compared with current cost-effective capacities would make them highly competitive. Within bioenergy policies, emphasis has been put on biofuels for transportation as this sector is fast-growing and represents a major source of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Compared with fossil fuels, biofuel combustion can emit less greenhouse gases throughout their life cycle, considering that part of the emitted CO2returns to the atmosphere where it was fixed from by photosynthesis in the first place. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is commonly used to assess the potential environmental impacts of biofuel chains, notably the impact on global warming. This tool, whose holistic nature is fundamental to avoid pollution trade-offs, is a standardised methodology that should make comparisons between biofuel and fossil fuel chains objective and thorough. However, it is a complex and time-consuming process, which requires lots of data, and whose methodology is still lacking harmonisation. Hence the life-cycle performances of biofuel chains vary widely in the** literature. Furthermore, LCA is a site- and time-independent tool that cannot take into account the spatial and temporal dimensions of emissions, and can hardly serve as a decision-making tool either at local or regional levels. Focusing on greenhouse gases, emission factors used in LCAs give a rough estimate of the potential average emissions on a national level. However, they do not take into account the types of crop, soil or management practices, for instance. Modelling the impact of local factors on the determinism of greenhouse gas emissions can provide better estimates for LCA on the local level, which would be the relevant scale and degree of reliability for decision-making purposes. Nevertheless, a deeper understanding of the processes involved, most notably N2O emissions, is still needed to definitely improve the accuracy of LCA. Perennial crops are a promising option for biofuels, due to their rapid and efficient use of nitrogen, and their limited farming operations. However, the main overall limiting factor to biofuel development will ultimately be land availability. Given the available land areas, population growth rate and consumption behaviours, it would be possible to reach by 2030 a global 10% biofuel share in the transport sector, contributing to lower global greenhouse gas emissions by up to 1GtCO2?eqper year (IEA,2006), provided that harmonised policies ensure that sustainability criteria for the production systems are respected worldwide. Furthermore, policies should also be more integrative across sectors, so that changes in energy efficiency, the automotive sector and global consumption patterns converge towards drastic reduction of the pressure on resources. Indeed, neither biofuels nor other energy source or carriers are likely to mitigate the impacts of anthropogenic pressure on resources in a range that would compensate for this pressure growth. Hence, the first step is to reduce this pressure by starting from the variable that drives it up, i.e. anthropic consumptions. Keywords: Biofuels,Energy, crops, Perennials, LCAGreenhouse gases,Climate change,Political and economic frameworks,Bioenergy, Land-use , Nitrous oxide, Carbon dioxide,Agricultural practices Citedy By: 162 Climate change and air pollution jointly creating nightmare for tourism industry Author: FaizaSajjad,UmaraNoreen,KhalidZaman, Journal: Environmental Science and Pollution Research ,Vol.21(21),2014--Pages Abstract: The objective of the study is to examine the long-run and causal relationship between climate change (i.e., greenhouse gas emissions, hydrofluorocarbons, per fluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride), air pollution (i.e., methane emissions, nitrous oxide emissions, and carbon dioxide emissions), and tourism development indicators (i.e., international tourism receipts, international tourism expenditures, natural resource depletion, and net forest depletion) in the Worlds largest regions. The aggregate data is used for robust analysis in the South Asia, the Middle East and North Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, and East Asia and the Pacific regions, over a period of 19752012. The results show that climatic factors and air pollution have a negative impact on tourism indicators in the form of deforestation and natural resource depletion. The impact is evident, as we have seen the systematic eroding of tourism industry, due to severe changes in climate and increasing strain of air pollution. There are several channels of causeeffect relationship between the climatic factors, air pollution, and tourism indicators in the Worlds region. The study confirms the unidirectional, bidirectional, and causality independent relationship between climatic factors, air pollution, and tourism indicators in the World. It is conclusive that tourism industry is facing all time bigger challenges of reduce investment, less resources, and minor importance from the government agencies because of the two broad challenges, i.e., climate change and air pollution, putting them in a dismal state. Keywords: Climate changeAir pollutionTourismWorlds region Citedy By: 26 A simple human vulnerability index to climate change hazards for Pakistan Author: FazalAliKhan,AliSalman, Journal: International Journal of Disaster Risk Science,Vol.3(3),2012--Pages Abstract: This article explores the spatial pattern of vulnerability to climate change hazards in Pakistan by developing a Human Vulnerability Index (HVI). For this purpose, we use Population Census 1998 and Agriculture Census 2000 data. The HVI places the 103 districts of Pakistan in rank order and looks at whether there is a correlation between human vulnerability and exposure to disaster of the districts with respect to climate change hazards such as floods. The HVI is further validated using an independent flood recovery data set. The study found that the HVI is a useful tool for identifying vulnerable regions and districts for resource allocation. But the HVI is a poor tool for vulnerability assessment at community and household levels. For this purpose we used logistic regression analysis, which indicates that the adult literacy rate, ownership of livestock, and access to electricity are the three (out of six) key variables that play a critical positive role in recovery after the 2010 floods. The primary data collected from households also reveal that the 2010 Pakistan floods have equally affecte d standing crops, livestock, and house structures. More than two-thirds of sample households had rebuilt their house structures, whereas livestock recovery was negligible since the floods. We also found that the 2010 floods affected some of the poverty regions of the country, but that there is a very weak systematic correlation between human vulnerability and disaster exposure. Keywords: climate changePakistanindex validationflood vulnerabilityHuman Vulnerability Index (HVI) Citedy By: 13 Peak globalization: Climate change, oil depletion and global trade Author: FredCurtis Journal: Ecological Economics ,Vol.69(2),2009--Pages Abstract: The global trade in goods depends upon reliable, inexpensive transportation of freight along complex and long-distance supply chains. Global warming and peak oil undermine globalization by their effects on both transportation costs and the reliable movement of freight. Countering the current geographic pattern of comparative advantage with higher transportation costs, climate change and peak oil will thus result in peak globalization, after which the volume of exports will decline as measured by ton-miles of freight. Policies designed to mitigate climate change and peak oil are very unlikely to change this result due to their late implementation, contradictory effects and insufficient magnitude. The implication is that supply chains will become shorter for most products and that production of goods will be located closer to where they are consumed. Keywords: Climate change Peak oil Globalization International trade Supply chains Citedy By: 103 The nexus approach to waterenergyfood security: an option for adaptation to climate change Author: G Rasul, B Sharma Journal: Climate Policy, 2016,Vol.16(6),2016--Pages Abstract: Developing countries face a difficult challenge in meeting the growing demands for food, water, and energy, which is further compounded by climate change. Effective adaptation to change requires the efficient use of land, water, energy, and other vital resources, and coordinated efforts to minimize trade-offs and maximize synergies. However, as in many developing countries, the policy process in South Asia generally follows a sectoral approach that does not take into account the interconnections and interdependence among the three sectors. Although the concept of a waterenergyfood nexus is gaining currency, and adaptation to climate change has become an urgent need, little effort has been made so far to understand the linkages between the nexus perspective and adaptation to climate change. Using the Hindu Kush Himalayan region as an example, this article seeks to increase understanding of the interlinkages in the water, energy, and food nexus, explains why it is important to consider this nexus in the context of adaptation responses, and argues that focusing on trade-offs and synergies using a nexus approach could facilitate greater climate change adaptation and help ensure food, water, and energy security by enhancing resource use efficiency and encouraging greater policy coherence. It concludes that a nexus-based adaption approach which integrates a nexus perspective into climate change adaptation plans and an adaptation perspective into development plans is crucial for effective adaptation. The article provides a conceptual framework for considering the nexus approach in relation to climate change adaptation, discusses the potential synergies, trade-offs, and offers a broader framework for making adaptation responses more effective. Keywords: Adaptation to climate change,Hindu Kush Himalayan region,policy coherence,synergies,trade-offs,waterfoodenergy nexus Citedy By: 40 Mitigating climate change how do corporate strategies differ? Author: G Weinhofer, VH Hoffm ann - Journal: Business Strategy and the Environment,Vol.19(2),2010--Pages Abstract: Many companies are facing increasing pressure by governments, shareholders and other stakeholders to reduce their CO2emissions in order to mitigate climate change. The importance of managing CO2emissions and crafting adequate CO2strategies has increased for those companies affected. We present a framework that conceptualizes a company's CO2strategy as the focus on one or a combination of several strategic objectives: CO2compensation, CO2reduction and carbon independence. In order to investigate the CO2strategies of a worldwide sample of 91 electricity producers we perform a content analysis of their answers to the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP). We demonstrate the measures the companies take to manage their emissions, the CO2strategies they adopt and antecedents that influence these strategies. We find that half of the companies take parallel emission management measures that aim at all three strategic objectives, while the other half pursue selected objectives only. We also find that companies with different CO2strategies significantly differ in terms of regional affiliation, company size and absolute amount of CO2emissions, while we could not identify a significant difference in relative CO2emissions. Copyright 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment. Keywords: Citedy By: 151 Geochemical record of chemical weathering and monsoon climate change since the early Miocene in the South China Sea Author: Gangjian Wei, Xian-Hua Li,Ying Liu,Lei Shao,Xirong Liang, Journal: Paleoceanography,Vol.21(4),2006--Pages Abstract: The chemical index of alteration (CIA) and elemental ratios that are sensitive to chemical weathering, such as Ca/Ti, Na/Ti, Al/Ti, Al/Na, Al/K, and La/Sm, were analyzed for detrital sediments at Ocean Drilling Program Site 1148 from the northern South China Sea to reveal information of chemical weathering in the source regions during the early Miocene. High CIA values of ~80, coupled with high Al/Ti and Al/Na and low Na/Ti and Ca/Ti, are observed for the sediments at ~23 Ma, indicating a high chemical weathering intensity in the north source region, i.e., south China. This was followed by gradual decreases in Al/Ti, Al/Na, La/Sm, and Al/K ratios, as well as the CIA values, and increases in Ca/Ti and Na/Ti ratios. These records together with other paleoclimate proxies, such as black carbond13C and benthic foraminiferd18O, give reliable information on the climate changes in south China. Our results show that the climate in south China was warm and humid in the early Miocene (~23 Ma) according to the chemical weathering records. The humidity in south China decreased from the early Miocene to Present with several fluctuations centering at approximately 15.7 Ma, 8.4 Ma, and 2.5 Ma, coincident with the global cooling since the middle Miocene. These climate changes implied that the summer east Asian monsoon has dramatically affected south China in the early Miocene, whereas the influence of the summer monsoon on this region has decreased continuously since that time, probably because of the intensification of the winter monsoon. Such an evolution for the east Asian monsoon is different from that for the Indian monsoon. Keywords: Citedy By: 78 Phytolith and Carbon Isotope Evidence for Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate Change in the Southern Black Hills, South Dakota Author: GG Fredlund,LL Tieszen Journal: Quaternary Research,Vol.47(2),1997--Pages Abstract: Analyses of phytoliths and carbon isotopes document change in late Quaternary grasslands in the Red Valley of the southern Black Hills. Late Pleistocene grassland composition was equivalent to the C3grass parklands of modern central Alberta. The rise of mixed grassland occurred rapidly between 11,000 and 9000 yr B.P. Early Holocene mixed grasslands included both short and tall C4grasses. A mid-Holocene erosional unconformity (ca. 8000 to 4500 yr B.P.) precludes phytolith or isotope analysis, but suggests lack of vegetation and landscape denudation caused by a drier climatic. Basin-wide stability and soil development followed the erosional episode (ca. 4500 to 3600 yr B.P.). Mesic-adapted C4panicoid grasses increased during this period of soil development. Low-magnitude fluctuation in the C4-dominated mixed grassland occurred throughout the late Holocene (3600 yr B.P. to present). Rise in d13C values during the last 1000 yr without corresponding change in phytoliths may indicate a decrease in woodlands caused by increased fire frequency. Keywords: Citedy By: 141 The role of seasonality in abrupt climate change Author: GH Denton, RB Alley, GC Comer Journal: Quaternary Science Reviews,Vol.24(10-11),2005--Pages Abstract: A case is made that seasonality switches dominated by wintertime were instrumental in abrupt climate changes in the North Atlantic region during the last glaciation and into the Holocene. The primary evidence comes from mismatches between mean annual temperatures from Greenland ice cores in comparison with snowline changes in East Greenland, northern Europe, and North America. The most likely explanation is a shutdown (or reduction in strength) of the conveyor. This allows the spread of winter sea ice across the North Atlantic, thus causing the northern region to experience much colder winters. Because they mimic the Greenland temperature rather than the snowline signal, changes in the Atlantic Intertropical Convergence Zone and the Asian monsoon may also share a winter linkage with Greenland. Thus the paleoclimate record is consistent with the notion that a huge continental sector of the Northern Hemisphere, stretching from Greenland to Asia, was close to an extreme winter threshold during much of the last glaciation. Winter climate crossed this threshold repeatedly, with marked changes in seasonality that may well have amplified and propagated a signal of abrupt change throughout the hemisphere and into the tropics. Keywords: Citedy By: 353 Glaciers and Glacial Lakes under Changing Climate in Pakistan Author: Ghulam Rasul1 , Q. Z. Chaudhry2 , Arif Mahmood2 Journal: PakistanJournal of Meteorology,Vol.8(15),2011--Pages Abstract: The Himalayas, Karakoram and Hindukush lofty mountain ranges meet each other in Pakistan hosting more than 5000 glaciers in Pakistani geographical limits which feed snow/ice melt water to the Indus River System together with summer monsoon. Due to global warming, frozen water resources have been losing their reserves at an unprecedented rate, not only, reducing the ice mass but increasing the number and extent of glacial lakes. Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) are the devastating mountain hazards which have started occurring with increased frequency during the recent years. An alarming increasing temperature trend in northern parts of Pakistan during the last decade which surpassed all the past records has enhanced the snow/ice melt rate and given rise to lake formation process some of which are potentially dangerous for outburst. Due to increase in temperature, the snowline has shifted upward causing migration of biodiversity and lower elevation glaciers have started melting faster. Snow used to occur now in late winter and disappears in early summer, hence, reducing the residency period to complete metamorphic processes for conversion into ice. Ponding of melt water underneath and around the terminal moraine need continuous monitoring to understand their supraglacial behavior and to assess the potential danger of outburst on scientific basis for development of an early warning mechanism. An initiative of The Mountain Institute (TMI) in collaboration of ICIMOD toward Global Glacial Lake Partnership is a step forward to manage such lakes to mitigate the potential losses due to their outburst Keywords: Glaciers, Glacial Lakes, Snowline Shift, Passu Lake, Global Glacial Lake Partnership Citedy By: 24 Change in mean temperature as a predictor of extreme temperature change in the AsiaPacific region Author: GM Griffiths,LE Chambers, MR Haylock Journal: International Journal Climatology,Vol.25(10),2005--Pages Abstract: Trends (19612003) in daily maximum and minimum temperatures, extremes and variance were found to be spatially coherent across the AsiaPacific region. The majority of stations exhibited significant trends: increases in mean maximum and mean minimum temperature, decreases in cold nights and cool days, and increases in warm nights. No station showed a significant increase in cold days or cold nights, but a few sites showed significant decreases in hot days and warm nights. Significant decreases were observed in both maximum and minimum temperature standard deviation in China, Korea and some stations in Japan (probably reflecting urbanization effects), but also for some Thailand and coastal Australian sites. The South Pacific convergence zone (SPCZ) region between Fiji and the Solomon Islands showed a significant increase in maximum temperature variability.Correlations between mean temperature and the frequency of extreme temperatures were strongest in the tropical Pacific Ocean from French Polynesia to Papua New Guinea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and southern Japan. Correlations were weaker at continental or higher latitude locations, which may partly reflect urbanization.For non-urban stations, the dominant distribution change for both maximum and minimum temperature involved a change in the mean, impacting on one or both extremes, with no change in standard deviation. This occurred from French Polynesia to Papua New Guinea (except for maximum temperature changes near the SPCZ), in Malaysia, the Philippines, and several outlying Japanese islands. For urbanized stations the dominant change was a change in the mean and variance, impacting on one or both extremes. This result was particularly evident for minimum temperature.The results presented here, for non-urban tropical and maritime locations in the AsiaPacific region, support the hypothesis that changes in mean temperature may be used to predict changes in extreme temperatures. At urbanized or higher latitude locations, changes in variance should be incorporated. Copyright 2005 Royal Meteorological Society. Keywords: Citedy By: 191 Asian Aerosols: Current and Year 2030 Distributions and Implications to Human Health and Regional Climate Change Author: GR Carmichael, B Adhikary, S Kulkarni - Journal: science& technology, 2009,Vol.43(15),2009--Pages Abstract: Aerosol distributions in Asia calculated over a 4-year period and constrained by satellite observations of aerosol optical depth (AOD) are presented. Vast regions in Asia that include >80% of the population have PM2.5concentrations that exceed on an annual basis the WHO guideline of 10 g/m3, often by factors of 2 to 4. These high aerosol loadings also have important radiative effects, causing a significant dimming at the surface, and mask ~45% of the warming by greenhouse gases. Black carbon (BC) concentrations are high throughout Asia, representing 5-10% of the total AOD, and contributing significantly to atmospheric warming (its warming potential is ~55% of that due to CO2). PM levels and AODs in year 2030, estimated based on simulations that consider future changes in emissions, are used to explore opportunities for win-win strategies built upon addressing air quality and climate change together. It is found that in 2030 the PM2.5levels in significant parts of Asia will increase and exacerbate health impacts; but the aerosols will have a larger masking effect on radioactive forcing, due to a decrease in BC and an increase in SO2emissions. Keywords: Citedy By: 81 Recent (19802009) evidence of climate change in the upper Karakoram, Pakistan Author: Guglielmina Diolaiuti, Daniele Bocchiola Journal: Theoretical and Applied Climatology,Vol.113(4-5),2003--Pages Abstract: We investigate here recent (19802009) climate variability in the upper Karakoram, Northern Pakistan, of particular interest given the peculiar glacier behavior during the last two decades. Differently from other glacierized regions in the Hindu KushKarakoramHimalaya region, glaciers in the Karakoram display limited ice thinning, and in some cases advancing has been detected. Climate analysis is required to describe recent (i.e., last three decades) variability, to aid highlighting of the factors driving glacier evolution. Starting from monthly data, we analyze seasonal values of total precipitation, number of wet days, maximum (max) and minimum (min) air temperature, max precipitation in 24 h, and cloud cover for 17 weather stations in the upper Karakoram, clustered within three climatic regions as per use of principal components analysis. We detect possible nonstationarity in each of these regions by way of (1) linear regression, (2) moving window average, and (3) MannKendall test, also in progressive form, to detect the onset date of possible trends. We then evaluate linear correlation coefficients between Northern Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) index and climate variables to assess effectiveness of teleconnections, claimed recently to affect climate in this area. Also, we compare temperature within the investigated zone against global temperature anomalies, to evidence enhanced warming within this area. We found mostly nonsignificant changes of total precipitation, unless for few stations displaying increase in Chitral-Hindu Kush region and Northwest Karakoram, or Gilgit area, and decrease in Western Himalaya, Kotli region. Max precipitation is mostly unchanged, unless for slight increase in Chitral and Gilgit areas, and slight decrease in Kotli region. Number of wet days is mostly increasing in Gilgit area, and decreasing in Chitral area, with no clear signal in Kotli region. Min temperatures increase always but during Summer, when decreasing values are detected, especially for Gilgit and Chitral regions. Max temperatures are found to increase everywhere. Cloud cover is significantly increasing in Gilgit area, but decreasing otherwise, especially in Kotli region. Max temperature regime is significantly positively correlated against global thermal anomaly, while min temperature regime is nonsignificantly negatively correlated. Max and min temperatures seem mostly negatively correlated to NAO. Some dependence of trend intensity for the considered variables against altitude is found, different for each region, suggesting that investigation of weather variables at the highest altitudes is warranted to discriminate further climate variability in the area Keywords: Citedy By: 567 Vulnerability and adaptability of wheat production in different climatic zones of Pakistan under climate change scenarios Author: H Sultana, N Ali, MM Iqbal, AM Khan Journal: ClimaticChange,,Vol.94(1-2),2009--Pages Abstract: Ten wheat production sites of Pakistan were categorized into four climatic zones i.e. arid, semi-arid, sub-humid and humid to explore the vulnerability of wheat production in these zones to climate change using CSM-Cropsim-CERES-Wheat model. The analysis was based on multi-year (19712000) crop model simulation runs using daily weather series under scenarios of increased temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration (CO2) along with two scenarios of water management. Apart from this, sowing date as an adaptation option to offset the likely impacts of climate change was also considered. Increase in temperature resulted in yield declines in arid, semi-arid and sub-humid zone. But the humid zone followed a positive trend of gain in yield with rise in temperature up to 4C. Within a water regime, increase in CO2concentration from 375 to 550 and 700 ppm will exert positive effect on gain in wheat yield but this positive effect is significantly variable in different climatic zones under rainfed conditions than the full irrigation. The highest response was shown by arid zone followed by semi-arid, sub-humid and humid zones. But if the current baseline water regimes (i.e. full irrigation in arid and semi-arid zones and rainfed in sub-humid and humid zones) persist in future, the sub-humid zone will be most benefited in terms of significantly higher percent gain in yield by increasing CO2 level, mainly because of its rainfed water regime. Within a CO2 level the changes in water supply from rainfed to full irrigation shows an intense degree of responsiveness in terms of yield gain at 375 ppm CO2 level compared to 550 and 700 ppm. Arid and semi-arid zones were more responsive compared to sub-humid and humid zones. Rise in temperature reduced the length of crop life cycle in all areas, though at an accelerated rate in the humid zone. These results revealed that the climatic zones have shown a variable intensity of vulnerability to different scenarios of climate change and water management due to their inherent specific and spatial climatic features. In order to cope with the negative effects of climate change, alteration in sowing date towards cooler months will be an appropriate response by the farmers. Keywords: Citedy By: 42 Impacts of Present and Future Climate Variability and Change on Agriculture and Forestry in the Arid and Semi-Arid Tropics Author: H.P.Das,O.Brunini,M.V.K.Sivakumar, Journal: Climatic Change, 2005,Vol.70(1-2),2005--Pages Abstract: The arid and semi-arid regions account for approximately 30% of the world total area and are inhabited by approximately 20% of the total world population. Issues of present and future climate variability and change on agriculture and forestry in the arid and semi-arid tropics of the world were examined and discussion under each of these issues had been presented separately for Asia, Africa and Latin America. Several countries in tropical Asia have reported increasing surface temperature trends in recent decades. Although, there is no definite trend discernible in the long-term mean for precipitation for the tropical Asian region, many countries have shown a decreasing trend in rainfall in the past three decades. African rainfall has changed substantially over the last 60 yr and a number of theoretical, modelling and empirical analyses have suggested that noticeable changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme events, including floods may occur when there are only small changes in climate. Climate in Latin America is affected by the El Nio-southern oscillation (ENSO) phases and there is a close relationship between the increase and decrease of rainfall depending upon the warm or cold phases of the phenomenon. Over land regions of Asia, the projected area-averaged annual mean warming is likely to be 1.6 0.2C in the 2020s, 3.1 0.3C in the 2050s, and 4.6 0.4C in the 2080s and the models show high uncertainty in projections of future winter and summer precipitation. Future annual warming across Africa is projected to range from 0.2C per decade to more than 0.5C per decade, while future changes in mean seasonal rainfall in Africa are less well defined. In Latin America, projections indicate a slight increase in temperature and changes in precipitation. Impacts of climate variability and changes are discussed with suitable examples. Agricultural productivity in tropical Asia is sensitive not only to temperature increases, but also to changes in the nature and characteristics of monsoon. Simulations of the impacts of climate change using crop simulation models show that crop yield decreases due to climate change could have serious impacts on food security in tropical Asia. Climate change is likely to cause environmental and social stress in many of Asias rangelands and drylands. In the arid and semi-arid tropics of Africa, which are already having difficulty coping with environmental stress, climate change resulting in increased frequencies of drought poses the greatest risk to agriculture. Impacts were described as those related to projected temperature increases, the possible consequences to water balance of the combination of enhanced temperatures and changes in precipitation and sensitivity of different crops/cropping systems to projected changes. In Latin America, agriculture and water resources are most affected through the impact of extreme temperatures (excessive heat, frost) and the changes in rainfall (droughts, flooding). Adaptation potential in the arid and semi-arid tropics of Asia, Africa and Latin America was described using suitable examples. It is emphasized that approaches need to be prescriptive and dynamic, rather than descriptive and static. Keywords: Citedy By: 221 The potential of biomass fuels in the context of globalclimate change: focus on transportation fuels Author: Haroon S. Kheshgi1, Roger C. Prince1, and Gregg Marland2 Journal: Annual Review of Energy and the Environment nt,Vol.25(),2000--Pages Abstract: An ultimate limit on the extent that biomass fuels can be used to displace fossil transportation fuels, and their associated emissions of CO2, will be the land area available to produce the fuels and the efficiencies by which solar radiation can be converted to useable fuels. Currently, the Brazil cane-ethanol system captures 33% of the primary energy content in harvested cane in the form of ethanol. The US corn-ethanol system captures 54% of the primary energy of harvested corn kernels in the form of ethanol. If ethanol is used to substitute for gasoline, avoided fossil fuel CO2emissions would equal those of the substituted amount minus fossil emissions incurred in producing the cane- or corn-ethanol. In this case, avoided emissions are estimated to be 29% of harvested cane and 14% of harvested corn primary energy. Unless these efficiencies are substantially improved, the displacement of CO2emissions from transportation fuels in the United States is unlikely to reach 10% using domestic biofuels. Candidate technologies for improving these efficiencies include fermentation of cellulosic biomass and conversion of biomass into electricity, hydrogen, or alcohols for use in electric drive-train vehicles. Keywords: bioenergy;biofuels;ethanol;carbon dioxide. Citedy By: 213 Accounting for Carbon: The Role of Accounting Professional Organisations in Governing Climate Change Author: Heather Lovell,Donald MacKenzie, Journal: Antipode, 2011,Vol.43(3),2011--Pages Abstract: Since the turn of the century accounting professional organisations have been involved in a number of debates about climate change, catalysed initially by technical discussions about the treatment of European carbon credits in financial accounts. These bodies are positioning themselves as leading on climate change, for example, through launching professional training courses, funding research, and initiating corporate workshops and seminars. The paper examines the role of the accountancy profession in governing the new carbon economy. We review climate change related activities undertaken by accountancy professional bodies through drawing on primary empirical material, including interviews with accountants, accountancy standard setters and professional bodies. A mix of theories about the role of calculation, measurement and expertise in governance are used to help explain and understand the situation, including ideas about accountancy and society, epistemic communities, and governmentality. Keywords: Citedy By: 96 How warm is the corporate response toclimate change? Evidence fromPakistanand the UK Author: HK Jeswani, W Wehrmeyer Journal: Business Strategy and the Environmen,Vol.17(1),2008--Pages Abstract: In response to growing consensus among scientists and governments to act fast to avoid dangerous impacts of climate change, many industries have started to prepare for a carbon-constrained world. However, this response is far from being uniform. Often action is predicated on economic, technological, organizational and institutional drivers and barriers, which vary between countries and across industrial sectors. In order to understand the effectiveness of industry response, it is therefore important to analyze corporate response across different sectors in different countries. Focusing on the nine most energy-intensive and greenhouse gas (GHG) emitting industrial sectors, this paper compares corporate responses to climate change in Pakistan and the UK. By analysing the divergence of strategies adopted by industries across different sectors in two countries, the paper examines the key factors influencing corporate adoption and implementation of GHG reduction and energy-efficiency strategies in Pakistan and the UK. Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment. Keywords: Citedy By: 174 Harnessing nature to help people adapt to climate change Author: Holly P. Jones, David G. Hole and Erika S. Zavaleta Journal: NatureClimate Change, 2012,Vol.(27),2012--Pages Abstract: Adapting to climate change is among the biggest challenges humanity faces in the next century. An overwhelming focus of adaptation strategies to reduce climate change-related hazards has been on hard-engineering structures such as sea walls, irrigation infrastructure and dams. Closer attention to a broader spectrum of adaptation options is urgently needed. In particular, ecosystem-based adaptation approaches provide flexible, cost-effective and broadly applicable alternatives for buffering the impacts of climate change, while overcoming many drawbacks of hard infrastructure. As such, they are a critical tool at adaptation planners disposal for tackling the threats that climate change poses to peoples lives and livelihood Keywords: Citedy By: 165 Global water resources affected by human interventions and climate change Author: I Haddeland,J Heinke,H Biemans Journal: Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the United state of America ,Vol.111(9),2014--Pages Abstract: Humans directly change the dynamics of the water cycle through dams constructed for water storage, and through water withdrawals for industrial, agricultural, or domestic purposes. Climate change is expected to additionally affect water supply and demand. Here, analyses of climate change and direct human impacts on the terrestrial water cycle are presented and compared using a multimodel approach. Seven global hydrological models have been forced with multiple climate projections, and with and without taking into account impacts of human interventions such as dams and water withdrawals on the hydrological cycle. Model results are analyzed for different levels of global warming, allowing for analyses in line with temperature targets for climate change mitigation. The results indicate that direct human impacts on the water cycle in some regions, e.g., parts of Asia and in the western United States, are of the same order of magnitude, or even exceed impacts to be expected for moderate levels of global warming (+2 K). Despite some spread in model projections, irrigation water consumption is generally projected to increase with higher global mean temperatures. Irrigation water scarcity is particularly large in parts of southern and eastern Asia, and is expected to become even larger in the future. Keywords: Citedy By: 189 Evolution of Miocene fluvial environments, eastern Potwar plateau, northern Pakistan Author: IMRAN A. KHAN,JOHN S. BRIDGE,JOHN KAPPELMAN,REGAN WILSON Journal: Sedimentology, 1997,Vol.44(2),1997--Pages Abstract: The Miocene-Pliocene Siwalik Group records changing fluvial environments in the Himalayan foreland basin. The Nagri and Dhok Pathan Formations of this Group in the eastern Potwar Plateau, northern Pakistan, comprise relatively thick (tens of metres) sandstone bodies and mudstones that contain thinner sandstone bodies (metres thick) and palaeosols. Thick sandstone bodies extend for kilometres normal to palaeoflow, and are composed of large-scale stratasets (storeys) stacked laterally and vertically adjacent to each other. Sandstone bodies represent single or superimposed braided-channel belts, and large-scale stratasets represent channel bars and fills. Channel belts had widths of km, bankfull discharges on the order of 103cumecs and braiding parameter up to about 3. Individual channel segments had bankfull widths, maximum depths, and slopes on the order of 102m, 101m and 10-4respectively, and sinuosities around 1-1. These rivers are comparable to many of those flowing over the megafans of the modern Indo-Gangetic basin, and a similar depositional setting is likely. Thin sandstone bodies within mudstone sequences extend laterally for on the order of 102m and have lobe, wedge, sheet and channel-form geometries: they represent crevasse splays, levees and floodplain channels. Mudstones are relatively bioturbated/disrupted and represent mainly floodbasin and lacustrine deposition. Mudstones and sandstones are extremely disrupted in places, showing evidence of prolonged pedogenesis. These mature palaeosols are m thick and extend laterally for km. Lateral and vertical variations in the nature of their horizons apparently depend mainly on deposition rate. The 500 m-thick Nagri Formation has a greater proportion and thicker sandstone bodies than the overlying 700 m-thick Dhok Pathan Formation. The thick sandstone bodies and their large-scale stratasets thicken and coarsen through the Nagri Formation, then thin and fine at the base of the Dhok Pathan Formation. Compacted deposition rates increase with sandstone proportion (0-53 mm/year for Nagri, 0-24 mm/year for Dhok Pathan), and palaeosols are not as well developed where deposition rates are high. Within both formations there are 100 m-scale variations (representing on the order of 105years) in the proportion and thickness of thick sandstone bodies, and tens-of-m-scale alternations of thick sandstone bodies and mudstone-sandstone strata that represent on the order of 104years. Formation-scale stratal variations extend across the Potwar Plateau for at least 100 km, although they may be diachronous: however, 100-m and smaller scale variations can only be traced laterally for up to tens of km. Alluvial architecture models indicate that increases in the proportion and thickness of thick sandstone bodies can be explained by increasing channel-belt sizes (mainly), average deposition rate and avulsion frequency on a megafan comparable in size to modern examples. 100-m-scale variations in thick sandstone-body proportion and thickness could result from regional shifts in the position of major channels, possibly associated with fan lobeson a single megafan or with separate megafans. However, such variations could also be related to local changes in subsidence rate or changes in sediment supply to the megafan system. Formation-scale and 100-m-scale stratal variations are probably associated with interelated changes in tectonic uplift, sediment supply and basin subsidence. Increased rates of hinterland uplift, sediment supply and basin subsidence, recorded by the Nagri Formation, may have resulted in diversion of a relatively large river to the area. Alternatively, changing river sizes and sediment supply rates may be related to climate changes affecting the hinterland (possibly linked to tectonic uplift). Climate during deposition of the Siwalik Group was monsoonal. Although the deposits contain nodirectevidence for climate change, independent evidence indicates global cooling throughout the Miocene, and the possibility of glacial periods (e.g. around 10-8 Ma, corresponding to base of Nagri Formation). If the higher Himalayas were periodically glaciated, a mechanism would exist for varying sediment supply to megafans on time scales of 104-105years. Although eustatic sea-level changes are related to global climatic change, they are not directly related to Siwalik stratigraphic changes, because the shoreline was many 100 km away during the Miocene. Keywords: Citedy By: 72 Climate changemitigation in the energy and forestry sectors of developing countries Author: JA Sathaye,NH Ravindranath Journal: Annual Review of Energy and the Environment ,Vol.23(),1998--Pages Abstract: The continued accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is expected to severely impact the earth's natural resources and agriculture. Greenhouse gas emissions from the developing world are rising faster than those from other countries, and many studies have noted that it would not be possible to stabilize climate change without reducing the growth of these emissions. Can this be achieved without affecting economic growth and social fabric in these countries? Mitigation studies indicate that if energy efficiency and forestry options are implemented judiciously, emissions can be reduced at a negative cost without affecting economic growth. The studies also suggest that this would increase significantly the worldwide demand for natural gas and renewable technologies. Country studies show that the aggregate mitigation potential in the forestry sector is higher, and the costs per tonne of carbon are lower, than reported earlier by global studies. Barriers to the implementation of energy and forestry options need to be explicitly taken into consideration because these may change the priority of options and the choice of policy measures. Keywords: costs;Kyoto;bottom-up;top-down. Citedy By: 110 Late Miocene environmental change in Nepal and the northern Indian subcontinent: Stable isotopic evidence from paleosols Author: Jay Quade,,John M.L. Cater,,Tank P. Ojha,,Jon Adam,,T. Mark Harrison, Journal: GSA BULLETIN ,Vol.107(12),1995--Pages Abstract: Neogene sediments belonging to the Siwalik Group crop out in the Himalayan foothills along the length of southern Nepal. Carbon and oxygen isotopic analyses of Siwalik paleosols from four long Siwalik sections record major ecological changes over the past ~11 m.y. The carbon isotopic composition of both soil carbonate and organic matter shifts dramatically starting ca. 7.0 Ma, marking the displacement of largely C3vegetation, probably semi-deciduous forest, by C4grasslands. By the beginning of the Pliocene, all the flood plains of major rivers in this region were dominated by monsoonal grasslands. The floral shift away from woody plants is also reflected by the decline and final disappearance of fossil leaves and the decrease in coal logs in the latest Miocene. A similar carbon isotopic shift has been documented in the paleosol and fossil tooth record of Pakistan, and in terrigenous organic matter from the Bengal Fan, showing that the floral shift was probably continentwide. The latest Miocene also witnessed an average change of ~4 in the oxygen isotopic composition of soil carbonate, as observed previously in Pakistan. The reasons for this are unclear; if not diagenetic, a major environmental change is indicated, perhaps related to that driving the carbon isotopic shift. Recently described pollen and leaf fossils from the Surai Khola section show that evergreen forest was gradually displaced by semi-deciduous and dry deciduous forest between 11 and 6 Ma. The gradual nature of this floral shift, which culminated in the rapid expansion of C4grasses starting ~7.0 m.y. ago, is difficult to explain by a decrease in atmospheric pCO2alone (Cerling et al., 1993) but fits well with a gradual onset of monsoonal conditions in the late Miocene in the northern Indian subcontinent. Himalayan uplift, driving both monsoonal intensification and consumption of CO2through weathering, may be the common cause behind major late Miocene environmental change globally. However, the decline of effective moisture associated with monsoon development has probably slowed, not increased, the rate of consumption of CO2by chemical weathering of Himalayan sediments Keywords: Citedy By: 279 Climate Change Impacts on Glacier Hydrology and River Discharge in the Hindu KushHimalayas Author: JD Miller,WW Immerzeel,G Rees Journal: Mountain Research and Development ,Vol.37(),2012--Pages Abstract: Rising temperatures and changing precipitation patterns across the Hindu KushHimalaya (HKH) region resulting from climate change have an influence on water resource availability and food security for the downstream population. This review seeks to objectively assess the available evidence of the impacts of climate change on glacier hydrology and the wider implications upon water resources within the Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra basins. Glacier meltwater contribution to river flows is scale dependent and varies considerably across the eastwest climatic zones of the HKH. For the Ganges and Brahmaputra this contribution is estimated to be significantly less than for the Indus to the west, with summer monsoon rains dominating flows from central and easterly areas, whereas meltwater remains a significant contributor to downstream flow of westerly basins, which receive most precipitation during winter. No corroborated trends exist in observed discharge for any basin, and such analyses are hindered by a lack of good-quality long-term data. Predicted increases in temperature will drive increased shrinkage of glaciers, leading to initial increases in meltwater produced, followed by subsequent declines with reduced glacier mass. The impacts of such changes are predicted to be minimal for the overall discharge of the Ganges and Brahmaputra, where increases in rainfall may in fact lead to increased flows but with greater variability. Within the Indus basin, reduced meltwater will have significant impacts upon available runoff; however, increased uncertainties surrounding precipitation and socioeconomic changes limit any conclusive assessment of how water availability will be affected; moreover, seasonality of runoff may be a more important factor. Scientific challenges and research recommendations are identified for the region. This review proposes the need for the scientific evidence pertaining to the region's glacier systems to be approached objectively in the future, such that a robust assessment of change can be attained. Keywords: Glacier,climate change,hydrology,water,Himalaya Citedy By: 40 Modeling the Impacts of Corporate Commitment on Climate Change Author: Jean-Franois Henri,David Talbot,Olivier Boiral Journal: Business Strategy and the Environment ,Vol.21(8),2012--Pages Abstract: The aim of this paper is to propose an integrative framework for understanding the determinants of business strategies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the impact of these determinants on performance. The proposed structural equation model is based on a survey of 319 Canadian manufacturing firms. The study calls into question the traditionally positive relationship between a firm's environmental commitment and its economic motivations. However, the results also show a winwin relationship between the commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and financial performance. This study contributes to the understanding of the motivations underlying the efforts manufacturers make to tackle climate change and their economic benefits. Copyright 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment. Keywords: Citedy By: 58 Implications of climate change for agricultural productivity in the early twenty-first century Author: JemmaGornall,RichardBetts,EleanorBurke,RobinClark,JoanneCamp,KateWillett,AndrewWiltshire Journal: The Royal Society ,Vol.365(1554),2010--Pages Abstract: This paper reviews recent literature concerning a wide range of processes through which climate change could potentially impact global-scale agricultural productivity, and presents projections of changes in relevant meteorological, hydrological and plant physiological quantities from a climate model ensemble to illustrate key areas of uncertainty. Few global-scale assessments have been carried out, and these are limited in their ability to capture the uncertainty in climate projections, and omit potentially important aspects such as extreme events and changes in pests and diseases. There is a lack of clarity on how climate change impacts on drought are best quantified from an agricultural perspective, with different metrics giving very different impressions of future risk. The dependence of some regional agriculture on remote rainfall, snowmelt and glaciers adds to the complexity. Indirect impacts via sea-level rise, storms and diseases have not been quantified. Perhaps most seriously, there is high uncertainty in the extent to which the direct effects of CO2rise on plant physiology will interact with climate change in affecting productivity. At present, the aggregate impacts of climate change on global-scale agricultural productivity cannot be reliably quantified. Keywords: Citedy By: 356 To What Extent is Business Responding to Climate Change? Evidence from a Global Wine Producer Author: JeremyGalbreath, Journal: Journal of Business Ethics,Vol.104(3),2011--Pages Abstract: Most studies on climate change response have examined reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Yet these studies do not take into account ecosystem services constraints and biophysical disruptions wrought by climate change that may require broader types of response. By studying a firm in the wine industry and using a research approach not constrained by structured methodologies or biased toward GHG emissions, the findings suggest that both inside out and outside in actions are taken in response to climate change. While attempts are made by the firm to curtail and reverse climate change through management of carbon emissions, evidence suggests a clear pattern of actions designed to adjust to the adverse consequences of climate change as well. The results both confirm and extend previous findings and suggest that the level and breadth of response to climate change is shaped by situated attention, structural controls, and industry type. Keywords: AustraliaClimate change,Greenhouse gas, emissions, MitigativeStrategy, Sustainability Citedy By: 48 Climate change impacts on crop productivity in Africa and South Asia Author: Jerry Knox,Tim Hess,Andre DaccacheandTim Wheeler Journal: Environmental Research Letters,Vol.7(3),2012--Pages Abstract: Climate change is a serious threat to crop productivity in regions that are already food insecure. We assessed the projected impacts of climate change on the yield of eight major crops in Africa and South Asia using a systematic review and meta-analysis of data in 52 original publications from an initial screen of 1144 studies. Here we show that the projected mean change in yield of all crops is -8% by the 2050s in both regions. Across Africa, mean yield changes of -17% (wheat), -5% (maize), -15% (sorghum) and -10% (millet) and across South Asia of -16% (maize) and -11% (sorghum) were estimated. No mean change in yield was detected for rice. The limited number of studies identified for cassava, sugarcane and yams precluded any opportunity to conduct a meta-analysis for these crops. Variation about the projected mean yield change for all crops was smaller in studies that used an ensemble of >3 climate (GCM) models. Conversely, complex simulation studies that used biophysical crop models showed the greatest variation in mean yield changes. Evidence of crop yield impact in Africa and South Asia is robust for wheat, maize, sorghum and millet, and either inconclusive, absent or contradictory for rice, cassava and sugarcane. Keywords: Citedy By: 189 A Simulation of Biomes on the Tibetan Plateau and Their Responses to Global Climate Change Author: Jian Ni Journal: Mountain Research and Development ,Vol.(),2000--Pages Abstract: The improved process-based equilibrium terrestrial biosphere model (BIOME3China) was run under the present climate to model the potential biomes on the Tibetan Plateau on a 109 grid. The simulated biome was basically in good agreement with a potential natural vegetation map based on a numerical comparison between two maps using the ?V statistic (?V = 0.38). A coupled ocean-atmosphere general circulation model including sulfate aerosols was used to drive a double greenhouse gas scenario to the end of the next century. The simulated vegetation under changed climate with a CO2concentration of 500 ppmv and a baseline biome map were also compared using the ?V statistic (?V = 0.4). The climate change would cause a large reduction in the temperate desert, alpine steppe, desert, and ice/polar desert, a large increase in the cold-temperate conifer forest, temperate shrubland/meadow, and temperate steppe, and a general northwestward shift of all vegetation zones. In addition to simulation of biome distribution, BIOME3China also predicted net primary production (NPP) of each grid cell. Comparisons between predicted annual NPP and 160 forest NPP measurements show an agreement between them with a linear regression, despite many problems, such as the quality of the field data. The pattern of predicted annual NPP in the scenario with enhanced CO2concentration was the same as that under the present climate; however, the NPP of each biome would increase significantly. Present permafrost simulated using the air frost index was quite similar to the actual frozen ground distribution on the Tibetan Plateau. After the change in climate, the boundary between continuous and discontinuous permafrost would shift toward the north of the plateau by about 12 in latitude. The continuous permafrost would mostly disappear, whereas the no-permafrost area would greatly increase. The movement of permafrost would take place with the shift of vegetation zones to the north. The disappearance of permafrost and the expansion of no-permafrost areas would accelerate the desertification of the Tibetan Plateau. Keywords: Biome simulation,response to global climate change,Tibetan Plateau,terrestrial system modeling Citedy By: 149 Impacts and mitigation of climate change on Chinese cities Author: JiyuanLiu. .XiangzhengDeng Journal: Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability ,Vol.3(3),2011--Pages Abstract: China is experiencing rapid urbanization. The development of cities may be hampered by reduced access to resources and energy as well as natural disasters caused by climate change. In addition, the emission of greenhouse gases from construction and development may accelerate global climate change. In this review, we examine the effects of climate change and present possible solutions for Chinese cities. We also consider the development of low carbon cities as one option for reducing the emission of greenhouse gases. Finally, we discuss several issues related to climate change that merit further consideration Keywords: Citedy By: 38 Conservation and climate change: Assessing the vulnerability of snow leopard habitat to treeline shift in the Himalaya Author: JL Forrest, E Wikramanayake,R Shrestha Journal: Biological Conservation ,Vol.150(1),2012--Pages Abstract: Climate change is likely to affect the persistence of large, space-requiring species through habitat shifts, loss, and fragmentation. Anthropogenic land and resource use changes related to climate change can also impact the survival of wildlife. Thus, climate change has to be integrated into biodiversity conservation plans. We developed a hybrid approach to climate-adaptive conservation landscape planning for snow leopards in the Himalayan Mountains. We first mapped current snow leopard habitat using a mechanistic approach that incorporated field-based data, and then combined it with a climate impact model using a correlative approach. For the latter, we used statistical methods to test hypotheses about climatic drivers of treeline in the Himalaya and its potential response to climate change under three IPCC greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. We then assessed how change in treeline might affect the distribution of snow leopard habitat. Results indicate that about 30% of snow leopard habitat in the Himalaya may be lost due to a shifting treeline and consequent shrinking of the alpine zone, mostly along the southern edge of the range and in river valleys. But, a considerable amount of snow leopard habitat and linkages are likely to remain resilient to climate change, and these should be secured. This is because, as the area of snow leopard habitat fragments and shrinks, threats such as livestock grazing, retaliatory killing, and medicinal plant collection can intensify. We propose this approach for landscape conservation planning for other species with extensive spatial requirements that can also be umbrella species for overall biodiversity. Keywords: Snow leopard Climate adaptation Conservation planning Endangered species Climate change Himalaya Citedy By: 52 Climate change and future populations at risk of malaria Author: JM Hamilton, DJ Maddison,RSJ Tol Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.9(1),1999--Pages Abstract: Global estimates of the potential impact of climate change on malaria transmission were calculated based on future climate scenarios produced by the HadCM2 and the more recent HadCM3 global climate models developed by the UK Hadley Centre. This assessment uses an improved version of the MIASMA malaria model, which incorporates knowledge about the current distributions and characteristics of the main mosquito species of malaria.The greatest proportional changes in potential transmission are forecast to occur in temperate zones, in areas where vectors are present but it is currently too cold for transmission. Within the current vector distribution limits, only a limited expansion of areas suitable for malaria transmission is forecast, such areas include: central Asia, North America and northern Europe. On a global level, the numbers of additional people at risk of malaria in 2080 due to climate change is estimated to be 300 and 150 million forP. falciparumandP. vivaxtypes of malaria, respectively, under the HadCM3 climate change scenario. Under the HadCM2 ensemble projections, estimates of additional people at risk in 2080 range from 260 to 320 million forP. falciparumand from 100 to 200 million forP. vivax. Climate change will have an important impact on the length of the transmission season in many areas, and this has implications for the burden of disease. Possible decreases in rainfall indicate some areas that currently experience year-round transmission may experience only seasonal transmission in the future. Estimates of future populations at risk of malaria differ significantly between regions and between climate scenarios. Keywords: Climate change Malaria Modelling Citedy By: 455 The Melting Himalayas: Cascading Effects of Climate Change on Water, Biodiversity, and Livelihoods Author: J Xu,RE Grumbine, A Shrestha, M Eriksson Journal: Conservation Biology,Vol.23(3),2009--Pages Abstract: The Greater Himalayas hold the largest mass of ice outside polar regions and are the source of the 10 largest rivers in Asia. Rapid reduction in the volume of Himalayan glaciers due to climate change is occurring. The cascading effects of rising temperatures and loss of ice and snow in the region are affecting, for example, water availability (amounts, seasonality), biodiversity (endemic species, predatorprey relations), ecosystem boundary shifts (tree-line movements, high-elevation ecosystem changes), and global feedbacks (monsoonal shifts, loss of soil carbon). Climate change will also have environmental and social impacts that will likely increase uncertainty in water supplies and agricultural production for human populations across Asia. A common understanding of climate change needs to be developed through regional and local-scale research so that mitigation and adaptation strategies can be identified and implemented. The challenges brought about by climate change in the Greater Himalayas can only be addressed through increased regional collaboration in scientific research and policy making. Keywords: Citedy By: 379 Insurance Against Climate Change and Flooding in the Netherlands: Present, Future, and Comparison with Other Countries Author: J. C. J. M. Van Den Bergh W. J. W. Botzen Journal: Risk analysis, 2008,Vol.28(2),2008--Pages Abstract: Climate change is projected to cause severe economic losses, which has the potential to affect the insurance sector and public compensation schemes considerably. This article discusses the role insurance can play in adapting to climate change impacts. The particular focus is on the Dutch insurance sector, in view of the Netherlands being extremely vulnerable to climate change impacts. The usefulness of private insurance as an adaptation instrument to increased flood risks is examined, which is currently unavailable in the Netherlands. It is questioned whether the currently dominant role of the Dutch government in providing damage relief is justified from an economic efficiency perspective. Characteristics of flood insurance arrangements in the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Germany, and France are compared in order to identify possible future directions for arrangements in the Netherlands. It is argued that social welfare improves when insurance companies take responsibility for part of the risks associated with climate change. Keywords: Citedy By: 189 Climate change, human security and violent conflict Author: J Barnett,WN Adger Journal: Political geography,Vol.26(6),2007--Pages Abstract: Climate change is increasingly been called a security problem, and there has been speculation that climate change may increase the risk of violent conflict. This paper integrates three disparate but well-founded bodies of research on the vulnerability of local places and social groups to climate change, on livelihoods and violent conflict, and the role of the state in development and peacemaking, to offer new insights into the relationships between climate change, human security, and violent conflict. It explains that climate change increasingly undermines human security in the present day, and will increasingly do so in the future, by reducing access to, and the quality of, natural resources that are important to sustain livelihoods. Climate change is also likely to undermine the capacity of states to provide the opportunities and services that help people to sustain their livelihoods. We argue that in certain circumstances these direct and indirect impacts of climate change on human security may in turn increase the risk of violent conflict. The paper then outlines the broad contours of a research programme to guide empirical investigations into the risks climate change poses to human security and peace. Keywords: Climate change,Human security ,Violent conflict , state functions Citedy By: 756 Scenarios for vulnerability: opportunities and constraints in the context of climate change and disaster risk Author: J Birkmann, SL Cutter,DS Rothman, T Welle Journal: Climatic Change,2015,Vol.133(1),2015--Pages Abstract: Most scientific assessments for climate change adaptation and risk reduction are based on scenarios for climatic change. Scenarios for socio-economic development, particularly in terms of vulnerability and adaptive capacity, are largely lacking. This paper focuses on the utility of socio-economic scenarios for vulnerability, risk and adaptation research. The paper introduces the goals and functions of scenarios in general and reflects on the current global debate around shared socio-economic pathways (SSPs). It examines the options and constraints of scenario methods for risk and vulnerability assessments in the context of climate change and natural hazards. Two case studies are used to contrast the opportunities and current constraints in scenario methods at different scales: the global WorldRiskIndex, based on quantitative data and indicators; and a local participatory scenario development process in Jakarta, showing a qualitative approach. The juxtaposition of a quantitative approach with global data and a qualitative-participatory local approach provides new insights on how different methods and scenario techniques can be applied in vulnerability and risk research. Keywords: Citedy By: 37 Stable isotope composition of the carbonate concretion in loess and climate change Author: J Han, E Keppens, T Liu, R Paepe, W Jiang Journal: Quaternary International ,Vol.37(),1997--Pages Abstract: Carbonate concretions are commonly found in the loess in China. Oxygen and carbon isotopic compositions of carbonate concretions collected from 14 different paleosols (S1S14) in the Lishi Formation of Luochuan loess section, China were analysed. The isotopic compositions of concretion in loess are useful tools in paleoclimatic study. Usually the more developed the paleosol is, the less negative thed18O values and the more negative thed13C values are. The oxygen isotopic composition of these paleosols varies within a range of about 1.3. The carbon isotopic composition, however, shows larger variations from one paleosol to the other, within a range of 5.3. An attempt was made to semi-quantitatively estimate the paleosol formation temperature and precipitation based on the carbon and oxygen isotopic data obtained. Keywords: Citedy By: 82 Climate change, water resources, and the politics of adaptation in the Middle East and North Africa Author: J Sowers,A Vengosh,E Weinthal Journal: Climatic Change,Vol.104(3-4),2011--Pages Abstract: Through an examination of global climate change models combined with hydrological data on deteriorating water quality in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA), we elucidate the ways in which the MENA countries are vulnerable to climate-induced impacts on water resources. Adaptive governance strategies, however, remain a low priority for political leaderships in the MENA region. To date, most MENA governments have concentrated the bulk of their resources on large-scale supply side projects such as desalination, dam construction, inter-basin water transfers, tapping fossil groundwater aquifers, and importing virtual water. Because managing water demand, improving the efficiency of water use, and promoting conservation will be key ingredients in responding to climate-induced impacts on the water sector, we analyze the political, economic, and institutional drivers that have shaped governance responses. While the scholarly literature emphasizes the importance of social capital to adaptive governance, we find that many political leaders and water experts in the MENA rarely engage societal actors in considering water risks. We conclude that the key capacities for adaptive governance to water scarcity in MENA are underdeveloped. Keywords: Citedy By: 140 The impact of climate change on China's agriculture Author: J Wang, R Mendelsohn,A Dinar, J Huang Journal: Agricultural Economics ,Vol.40(3),2009--Pages Abstract: This article examines how expected changes in climate are likely to affect agriculture in China. The effects of temperature and precipitation on net crop revenues are analyzed using cross-sectional data consisting of both rainfed and irrigated farms. Based on survey data from 8,405 households across 28 provinces, the results suggest that global warming is likely to be harmful to rainfed farms but beneficial to irrigated farms. The net impacts will be only mildly harmful at first, but the damages will grow over time. The impacts also vary by region. Farms in the Southeast will only be mildly affected but farms in the Northeast and Northwest will bear the largest damages. However, the study does not capture the indirect effects on farms of possible changes in water flow, which may be important in China Keywords: Citedy By: 196 A meta-analysis of the predicted effects of climate change on wheat yields using simulation studies Author: J Wilcox,D Makowski Journal: Field Crops Research ,Vol.156(1),2014--Pages Abstract: Future climate change is expected to affect wheat yields. However, it is uncertain if the overall change in climate will result in wheat yield increases or decreases. This is due to the opposing effects of temperature, precipitation, and CO2concentration on wheat yields. In this study, a meta-analysis of simulated yield change was conducted to identify the levels of temperature, precipitation and CO2concentration that result in increasing or decreasing wheat yields. With data from 90 studies using computer modeling, we found that more than 50% of the simulated relative yield change resulted in yield losses when mean temperature change is higher than 2.3C, or mean precipitation change is null or less, or when CO2concentration is lower than 395ppm. A statistical model relating relative yield change to the three considered climatic variables was used to explore a large range of climate change scenarios. Results showed that, in average, the effects of high CO2concentrations (>640ppm) outweighed the effects of increasing temperature (up to +2C) and moderate declines in precipitation (up to -20%), leading to increasing yields. However, these results varied greatly from site to site, likely due to differences in topography, soils and farming practices. These results also do not take into account the effects of pests, diseases and weeds or climate variability, which may act to decrease wheat yields. Keywords: Wheat Triticum aestivum Climate change Meta-analysis Modeling Yield Citedy By: 33 Adaptation and development: Livelihoods and climate change in Subarnabad, Bangladesh Author: J Pouliotte, B Smit, L Westerhoff Journal: Climate and development,Vol.1(1),2009--Pages Abstract: This paper explores the relationship between environmental change and development through a vulnerability study of a rural village in southwest Bangladesh. Villagers deal with a variety of pressing stresses, and climate change is not considered separately, if at all. Environmental, political and economic conditions and adjustments in resource use systems, particularly shrimp farming, have changed livelihood opportunities and increased the vulnerabilities of poor villagers to future environmental changes, including climate change. Practical adaptation strategies to reduce vulnerabilities to climate-related stresses reflect the dynamics of people's livelihoods and address the conditions they currently face. In this case, planned adaptations were mainstreamed in the sense that they contributed to the livelihoods of people and made some improvement in their capacity to deal with changes in climate, and they were undertaken via established non-government institutions. Keywords: Adaptation,Asia,Bangladesh,climate change,livelihoods,vulnerability Citedy By: 87 Expansion of C4grasses in the Late Miocene of Northern Pakistan: evidence from stable isotopes in paleosols Author: J Quade,TE Cerling Journal: Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology ,Vol.115(1-4),1995--Pages Abstract: Stable-isotopic, clay-mineralogic, and bulk-chemical analyses were conducted on paleosols of the Neogene Siwalik sections in northern Pakistan in order to reconstruct floodplain environments over the past ~ 17 Ma. The stable carbon isotopic composition of soil carbonate (meand13C (PDB) = -10.2%) and associated organic matter (meand13C (PDB) = -24.1%) in paleosols representing 17- ~ 7.3 Ma reveal that floodplain vegetation was dominated by C3plants. At 7.3 Ma, a shift toward more positive carbon isotopic values began, signaling the gradual expansion of C4grasses onto the floodplain. From 6 Ma to present, carbon isotopic values for paleosol carbonate (meand13C (PDB) = +0.6%) and organic matter (meand13C (PDB) = -14.4%) are uniformly enriched in13C, indicating the presence of nearly pure C4grassland. Keywords: Citedy By: 335 Faunal and environmental change in the late Miocene Siwaliks of northern Pakistan Author: John C. Barry, ,Michle E. Morgan, ,Lawrence J. Flynn, ,David Pilbeam, ,Anna K. Behrensmeyer, ,S. Mahmood Raza, ,Imran A. Khan, ,Catherine Badgley, ,Jason Hicks, and,Jay Kelley, Journal: BioOne,Vol.28(3),2002--Pages Abstract: The Siwalik formations of northern Pakistan consist of deposits of ancient rivers that existed throughout the early Miocene through the late Pliocene. The formations are highly fossiliferous with a diverse array of terrestrial and freshwater vertebrates, which in combination with exceptional lateral exposure and good chronostratigraphic control allows a more detailed and temporally resolved study of the sediments and faunas than is typical in terrestrial deposits. Consequently the Siwaliks provide an opportunity to document temporal differences in species richness, turnover, and ecological structure in a terrestrial setting, and to investigate how such differences are related to changes in the fluvial system, vegetation, and climate. Here we focus on the interval between 10.7 and 5.7 Ma, a time of significant local tectonic and global climatic change. It is also the interval with the best temporal calibration of Siwalik faunas and most comprehensive data on species occurrences. A methodological focus of this paper is on controlling sampling biases that confound biological and ecological signals. Such biases include uneven sampling through time, differential preservation of larger animals and more durable skeletal elements, errors in age-dating imposed by uncertainties in correlation and paleomagnetic timescale calibrations, and uneven taxonomic treatment across groups. We attempt to control for them primarily by using a relative-abundance model to estimate limits for the first and last appearances from the occurrence data. This model also incorporates uncertainties in age estimates. Because of sampling limitations inherent in the terrestrial fossil record, our 100-Kyr temporal resolution may approach the finest possible level of resolution for studies of vertebrate faunal changes over periods of millions of years. Approximately 40,000 specimens from surface and screenwash collections made at 555 localities form the basis of our study. Sixty percent of the localities have maximum and minimum age estimates differing by 100 Kyr or less, 82% by 200 Kyr or less. The fossils represent 115 mammalian species or lineages of ten orders: Insectivora, Scandentia, Primates, Tubulidentata, Proboscidea, Pholidota, Lagomorpha, Perissodactyla, Artiodactyla, and Rodentia. Important taxa omitted from this study include Carnivora, Elephantoidea, and Rhinocerotidae. Because different collecting methods were used for large and small species, they are treated separately in analyses. Small species include insectivores, tree shrews, rodents, lagomorphs, and small primates. They generally weigh less than 5 kg. The sediments of the study interval were deposited by coexisting fluvial systems, with the larger emergent Nagri system being displaced between 10.1 and 9.0 Ma by an interfan Dhok Pathan system. In comparison to Nagri floodplains, Dhok Pathan floodplains were less well drained, with smaller rivers having more seasonally variable flow and more frequent avulsions. Paleosol sequences indicate reorganization of topography and drainage accompanying a transition to a more seasonal climate. A few paleosols may have formed under waterlogged, grassy woodlands, but most formed under drier conditions and more closed vegetation. The oxygen isotopic record also indicates significant change in the patterns of precipitation beginning at 9.2 Ma, in what may have been a shift to a drier and more seasonal climate. The carbon isotope record demonstrates that after 8.1 Ma significant amounts of C4grasses began to appear and that by 6.8 Ma floodplain habitats included extensive C4grasslands. Plant communities with predominantly C3plants were greatly diminished after 7.0 Ma, and those with predominantly C4plants, which would have been open woodlands or grassy woodlands, appeared as early as 7.4 Ma. Inferred first and last appearances show a constant, low level of faunal turnover throughout the interval 10.75.7-Ma, with three short periods of elevated turnover at 10.3, 7.8, and 7.37.0 Ma. The three pulses account for nearly 44% of all turnover. Throughout the late Miocene, species richness declined steadily, and diversity and richness indices together with data on body size imply that community ecological structure changed abruptly just after 10 Ma, and then again at 7.8 Ma. Between 10 and 7.8 Ma the large-mammal assemblages were strongly dominated by equids, with more balanced faunas before and after. The pattern of appearance and disappearance is selective with respect to inferred habits of the animals. Species appearing after 9.0 Ma are grazers or typical of more open habitats, whereas many species that disappear can be linked to more closed vegetation. We presume exceptions to this pattern were animals of the mixed C3/C4communities or the wetter parts of the floodplain that did not persist into the latest Miocene. The pace of extinction accelerates once there is C4vegetation on the floodplain. The 10.3 Ma event primarily comprises disappearance of taxa that were both common and of long duration. The event does not correlate to any obvious local environmental or climatic event, and the pattern of species disappearance and appearance suggests that biotic interactions may have been more important than environmental change. The 7.8 Ma event is characterized solely by appearances, and that at 7.3 Ma by a combination of appearances and disappearances. These two latest Miocene events include more taxa that were shorter ranging and less common, a difference of mode that developed between approximately 9.0 and 8.5 Ma when many short-ranging and rare species began to make appearances. Both events also show a close temporal correlation to changes in floodplain deposition and vegetation. The 7.8 Ma event follows the widespread appearance of C4vegetation and is coincident with the shift from equid-dominated to more evenly balanced large-mammal assemblages. The 7.3 to 7.0 Ma event starts with the first occurrence of C4-dominated floras and ends with the last occurrence of C3-dominated vegetation. Absence of a consistent relationship between depositional facies and the composition of faunal assemblages leads us to reject fluvial system dynamics as a major cause of faunal change. The close correlation of latest Miocene species turnover and ecological change to expansion of C4plants on the floodplain, in association with oxygen isotopic and sedimentological evidence for increasingly drier and more seasonal climates, causes us to favor explanations based on climatic change for both latest Miocene pulses. The Siwalik record supports neither coordinated stasis nor turnover pulse evolutionary models. The brief, irregularly spaced pulses of high turnover are characteristic of both the stasis and pulse models, but the high level of background turnover that eliminates 6570% of the initial species shows there is no stasis in the Siwalik record. In addition, the steadily declining species richness and abrupt, uncoordinated changes in diversity do not fit either model. Keywords: Citedy By: 366 Sociology and climate change Author: John Urry, Journal: Sociology and climate change ,Vol.57(2),2009--Pages Abstract: This chapter examines some major changes relating to the contemporary conditions of life upon earth. It deals especially with emergent contradictions that stem from shifts within capitalism over the course of the last century or so. These shifts involve moving from low carbon to high carbon economies/societies, from societies of discipline to societies of control, and more recently from specialized and differentiated zones of consumption to mobile, de-differentiated consumptions of excess. Sociological analysis, I argue, is thus central to examining high carbon societies and climate change. Keywords: Citedy By: 47 Consequences of Climate Change on the Ecogeomorphology of Coastal Wetlands Author: JohnW.DayEmail author , RobertR.Christian, DonaldM.Boesch, AlejandroYez-Arancibia, amesMorris, RobertR.Twilley, LarissaNaylor LindaSchaffne, CourtStevenson Journal: Consequences of Climate Change on the Ecogeomorphology of Coastal Wetlands,Vol.31(3),2008--Pages Abstract: Climate impacts on coastal and estuarine systems take many forms and are dependent on the local conditions, including those set by humans. We use a biocomplexity framework to provide a perspective of the consequences of climate change for coastal wetland ecogeomorphology. We concentrate on three dimensions of climate change affects on ecogeomorphology: sea level rise, changes in storm frequency and intensity, and changes in freshwater, sediment, and nutrient inputs. While sea level rise, storms, sedimentation, and changing freshwater input can directly impact coastal and estuarine wetlands, biological processes can modify these physical impacts. Geomorphological changes to coastal and estuarine ecosystems can induce complex outcomes for the biota that are not themselves intuitively obvious because they are mediated by networks of biological interactions. Human impacts on wetlands occur at all scales. At the global scale, humans are altering climate at rapid rates compared to the historical and recent geological record. Climate change can disrupt ecological systems if it occurs at characteristic time scales shorter than ecological system response and causes alterations in ecological function that foster changes in structure or alter functional interactions. Many coastal wetlands can adjust to predicted climate change, but human impacts, in combination with climate change, will significantly affect coastal wetland ecosystems. Management for climate change must strike a balance between that which allows pulsing of materials and energy to the ecosystems and promotes ecosystem goods and services, while protecting human structures and activities. Science-based management depends on a multi-scale understanding of these biocomplex wetland systems. Causation is often associated with multiple factors, considerable variability, feedbacks, and interferences. The impacts of climate change can be detected through monitoring and assessment of historical or geological records. Attribution can be inferred through these in conjunction with experimentation and modeling. A significant challenge to allow wise management of coastal wetlands is to develop observing systems that act at appropriate scales to detect global climate change and its effects in the context of the various local and smaller scale effects. Climate changeEcogeomorphologyCoastal wetlands Keywords: Citedy By: 197 ADAPTING THE LAW OF WATER MANAGEMENT TO GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE AND OTHER HYDROPOLITICAL STRESSES1 Author: Joseph W. Dellapenna, Journal: JAWRA Journal of the American Water Resources,Vol.35(6),1999--Pages Abstract: Existing legal regimes for the management of water resources are already stressed by changing technologies and growing populations. There is little reason for doubt that today the planet is undergoing significant and even alarming climate change. In the past such global climatic changes had dramatic effects on water resource availability with disastrous consequences for many human communities. Today's climate changes can be managed without such disastrous consequences for present day communities only if there are major reforms to existing water law regimes at the local, national, and international levels. In particular, at the local and national levels, water resources must be treated as public property rather than as common or private property. At the international level, water must be managed at the drainage basin level rather than according to national boundaries that largely ignore rational water management criteria. At all levels, care must be given to decentralizing decision making and to use economic incentives insofar as possible, without, however, mistaking economic incentives for markets. The public nature of water resources precludes true markets as a significant management tool. Keywords: Citedy By: 52 Climate change and the evolution of C4photosynthesis Author: JR Ehleringer,RF Sage,LB Flanagan Journal: Trends in Ecology & Evolution ,Vol.6(3),1999--Pages Abstract: Plants assimilate carbon by one of three photosynthetic pathways, commonly called the C3, C4, and CAM pathways. The C4photosynthetic pathway, found only among the angiosperms, represents a modification of C3metabolism that is most effective at low concentrations of CO2. Today, C4plants are most common in hot, open ecosystems, and it is commonly felt that they evolved under these conditions. However, high light and high temperature, by themselves, are not sufficient to favor the evolution of C4photosynthesis at atmospheric CO2levels significantly above the current ambient values. A review of evidence suggests that C4plants evolved in response to a reduction in atmospheric CO2levels that began during the Cretaceous and continued until the Miocene. Keywords: Citedy By: 493 Methodologies for simulating impacts of climate change on crop production Author: JW White,G Hoogenboom, BA Kimball, GW Wall Journal: Field Crops Research,Vol.124(3),2011--Pages Abstract: Ecophysiological models are widely used to forecast potential impacts of climate change on future agricultural productivity and to examine options for adaptation by local stakeholders and policy makers. However, protocols followed in such assessments vary to such an extent that they constrain cross-study syntheses and increase the potential for bias in projected impacts. We reviewed 221 peer-reviewed papers that used crop simulation models to examine diverse aspects of how climate change might affect agricultural systems. Six subject areas were examined: target crops and regions; the crop model(s) used and their characteristics; sources and application of data on [CO2] and climate; impact parameters evaluated; assessment of variability or risk; and adaptation strategies. Wheat, maize, soybean and rice were considered in approximately 170 papers. The USA (55 papers) and Europe (64 papers) were the dominant regions studied. The most frequent approach used to simulate response to CO2involved adjusting daily radiation use efficiency (RUE) and transpiration, precluding consideration of the interacting effects of CO2, stomatal conductance and canopy temperature, which are expected to exacerbate effects of global warming. The assumed baseline [CO2] typically corresponded to conditions 1030 years earlier than the date the paper was accepted, exaggerating the relative impacts of increased [CO2]. Due in part to the diverse scenarios for increases in greenhouse gas emissions, assumed future [CO2] also varied greatly, further complicating comparisons among studies. Papers considering adaptation predominantly examined changes in planting dates and cultivars; only 20 papers tested different tillage practices or crop rotations. Risk was quantified in over half the papers, mainly in relation to variability in yield or effects of water deficits, but the limited consideration of other factors affecting risk beside climate change per se suggests that impacts of climate change were overestimated relative to background variability. A coordinated crop, climate and soil data resource would allow researchers to focus on underlying science. More extensive model intercomparison, facilitated by modular software, should strengthen the biological realism of predictions and clarify the limits of our ability to forecast agricultural impacts of climate change on crop production and associated food security as well as to evaluate potential for adaptation. Keywords: Adaptation, Agricultural impacts, Climate change, Crop growth simulation, Global warming, Modeling Citedy By: 279 Monitoring spatio-temporal aerosol patterns over Pakistan based on MODIS, TOMS and MISR satellite data and a HYSPLIT model Author: K Alam,S Qureshi,T Blaschke Journal: Atmospheric Environment ,Vol.45(27),2011--Pages Abstract: Three different satellite-borne sensors, namely the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), and the Multi-angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), were used to investigate the spatial and temporal variations of aerosols over several cities in Pakistan. A Hybrid Single Particle Lagrangian Integrated Trajectory (HYSPLIT) model was used for trajectory analysis in order to reconstruct the origins of air masses and understand the spatio-temporal variability of aerosol concentrations. Recent MODIS aerosol data (20022008) and earlier TOMS data (19792001) revealed increasing concentrations of aerosols over Pakistan and adjacent areas. Validation of MODIS and MISR derived aerosol optical depths (AODs) with Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) data for 2007 demonstrated that the MISR data was more accurate when close to the ocean, while the MODIS was more accurate over vegetated areas. The relationship between MODIS and MISR AOD data from 2002 to 2008 was analyzed, revealing a strong correlation between the two datasets. An assessment of seasonal variability in AOD for industrial, urban, semi-urban, rural, and semi-arid areas revealed maximum AOD values during the summer over all the areas investigated. Back trajectory analyses indicated that while winter air masses reaching Pakistan had travelled long distances, summer air masses had travelled only short distances. The higher aerosol concentrations during the summer are interpreted to be a result of the air masses spending more time over land during the summer than they do during the winter. While monsoonal rainfall tends to reduce aerosol concentrations by washing aerosols out of the atmosphere, this effect is mainly restricted to the eastern and south-eastern parts of Pakistan Keywords: Aerosols TOMS MODIS MISR AERONET HYSPLIT AOD Remote sensing Pakistan Citedy By: 69 Diurnal temperature range as an index of global climate change during the twentieth century Author: K Braganza,DJ Karoly Journal: Geophysical Research Letters,Vol.31(13),2004--Pages Abstract: The usefulness of global-average diurnal temperature range (DTR) as an index of climate change and variability is evaluated using observations and climate model simulations representing unforced climate variability and anthropogenic climate change. On decadal timescales, modelled and observed intrinsic variability of DTR compare well and are independent of variations in global mean temperature. Observed reductions in DTR over the last century are large and unlikely to be due to natural variability alone. Comparison of observed and anthropogenic-forced model changes in DTR over the last 50 years show much less reduction in DTR in the model simulations due to greater warming of maximum temperatures in the models than observed. This difference is likely attributed to increases in cloud cover that are observed over the same period and are absent in model simulation Keywords: Citedy By: 191 How do Recent Population Trends Matter to Climate Change? Author: KarenHardee,LeiwenJiang, Journal: Population Research and Policy Review,Vol.30(2),2011--Pages Abstract: Although integrated assessment models (IAM) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) consider population as one of the root causes of greenhouse gas emissions, how population dynamics affect climate change is still under debate. Population is rarely mentioned in policy debates on climate change. Studies in the past decade have added significantly to understanding the mechanisms and complexity of population and climate interactions. In addition to the growth of total population size, research shows that changes in population composition (i.e. age, urbanrural residence, and household structure) generate substantial effects on the climate system. Moreover, studies by the impact, vulnerability and adaptation (IAV) community also reveal that population dynamics are critical in the near term for building climate change resilience and within adaptation strategies. This paper explores how global population dynamics affect carbon emissions and climate systems, how recent demographic trends matter to worldwide efforts to adapt to climate change, and how population policies could make differences for climate change mitigation and adaptation. Keywords: PopulationClimate changeDemographic trendMitigation and adaptation Citedy By: 123 Potential Impact of Global Climate Change on Species Richness of Long-Distance Migrants Author: Katrin Bhning-Gaese, Nicole Lemoine Journal: Conservation Biology,Vol.17(2),2003--Pages Abstract: Little evidence exists demonstrating that global climate change leads to systematic changes in the structure of ecological communities. For avian communities, one would expect warmer winters to lead to declines in numbers of long-distance migrants if resident birds benefit from warmer winters and impose increasing competitive pressure on migrants. To study the potential influence of global climate change on long-distance migrants, we correlated the number of all species of land birds and the number and proportion of long-distance migrants, short-distance migrants, and residents in 595 grid cells across Europe. We used mean temperature of the coldest month, mean spring temperature, and spring precipitation as measures of climatic conditions in winter and during the breeding period. The number and proportion of long-distance migrants decreased with increasing winter temperature, decreasing spring temperature, and increasing spring precipitation. We used this spatial relationship between bird community structure and climate in Europe to make predictions about changes in bird communities of the Lake Constance region, Central Europe, between two census periods (19801981 and 19901992). Winter temperature in this region increased significantly between the two censuses, whereas spring temperature and precipitation did not change. As predicted from the models, the proportion of long-distance migrants decreased and the number and proportion of short-distance migrants and residents increased between the two censuses. The significant declines of the long-distance migrants in the Lake Constance region are of a magnitude that can be explained by the observed climate change. Our results suggest that increasingly warmer winters may pose a more severe threat to long-distance migrants than to the other bird groups. Keywords: Citedy By: 134 Potential Impact of Global Climate Change on Species Richness of Long-Distance Migrants Author: Katrin Bhning-Gaese,Nicole Lemoine, Journal: Conservation Biology,Vol.17(2),2003--Pages Abstract: Little evidence exists demonstrating that global climate change leads to systematic changes in the structure of ecological communities. For avian communities, one would expect warmer winters to lead to declines in numbers of long-distance migrants if resident birds benefit from warmer winters and impose increasing competitive pressure on migrants. To study the potential influence of global climate change on long-distance migrants, we correlated the number of all species of land birds and the number and proportion of long-distance migrants, short-distance migrants, and residents in 595 grid cells across Europe. We used mean temperature of the coldest month, mean spring temperature, and spring precipitation as measures of climatic conditions in winter and during the breeding period. The number and proportion of long-distance migrants decreased with increasing winter temperature, decreasing spring temperature, and increasing spring precipitation. We used this spatial relationship between bird community structure and climate in Europe to make predictions about changes in bird communities of the Lake Constance region, Central Europe, between two census periods (19801981 and 19901992). Winter temperature in this region increased significantly between the two censuses, whereas spring temperature and precipitation did not change. As predicted from the models, the proportion of long-distance migrants decreased and the number and proportion of short-distance migrants and residents increased between the two censuses. The significant declines of the long-distance migrants in the Lake Constance region are of a magnitude that can be explained by the observed climate change. Our results suggest that increasingly warmer winters may pose a more severe threat to long-distance migrants than to the other bird groups. Keywords: Citedy By: 134 The ecology of climate change and infectious diseases Author: KD Lafferty Journal: Ecology,Vol.90(4),2009--Pages Abstract: The projected global increase in the distribution and prevalence of infectious diseases with climate change suggests a pending societal crisis. The subject is increasingly attracting the attention of health professionals and climate-change scientists, particularly with respect to malaria and other vector-transmitted human diseases. The result has been the emergence of a crisis discipline, reminiscent of the early phases of conservation biology. Latitudinal, altitudinal, seasonal, and interannual associations between climate and disease along with historical and experimental evidence suggest that climate, along with many other factors, can affect infectious diseases in a nonlinear fashion. However, although the globe is significantly warmer than it was a century ago, there is little evidence that climate change has already favored infectious diseases. While initial projections suggested dramatic future increases in the geographic range of infectious diseases, recent models predict range shifts in disease distributions, with little net increase in area. Many factors can affect infectious disease, and some may overshadow the effects of climate. Keywords: Citedy By: 618 Glacier Change, Concentration, and Elevation Effects in the Karakoram Himalaya, Upper Indus Basin Author: Kenneth Hewitt Journal: Mountain Research and Development ,Vol.31(3),2011--Pages Abstract: This paper seeks to explain evidence of distinctive late- and post-Little Ice Age glacier change in the Karakoram Himalaya and a recent, seemingly anomalous, expansion. Attention is directed to processes that support and concentrate glacier mass, including an all-year accumulation regime, avalanche nourishment, and effects related to elevation. Glacier basins have exceptional elevation ranges, and rockwalls make up the larger part of their area. However, more than 80% of the ice cover is concentrated between 4000 and 5500m elevation. Classification into Turkestan-, Mustagh-, and Alpine-type glaciers is revisited to help identify controls over mass balance. Estimates of changes based on snowlines, equilibrium line altitudes, and accumulation area ratio are shown to be problematic. Extensive debris covers in ablation zone areas protect glacier tongues. They are relatively insensitive to climate change, and their importance for water supply has been exaggerated compared to clean and thinly covered ablation zone ice. Recent changes include shifts in seasonal temperatures, snowfall, and snow cover at high elevations. Understanding their significance involves rarely investigated conditions at higher elevations that lack monitoring programs Keywords: Avalanche nourishment,glacier classification,ELA,AAR,rockwalls,debris-covered glaciers,elevation effects Citedy By: 128 Development based climate change adaptation and mitigationconceptual issues and lessons learned in studies in developing countries Author: KirstenHalsns,JanVerhagen, Journal: Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change ,Vol.12(5),2007--Pages Abstract: This paper discusses the conceptual basis for linking development policies and climate change adaptation and mitigation and suggests an analytical approach that can be applied to studies in developing countries. The approach is centred on a broad set of policy evaluation criteria that merge traditional economic and sectoral goals and broader social issues related to health and income distribution. The approach is inspired by institutional economics and development paradigms that emphasise human wellbeing, resource access, empowerment, and the arrived freedoms. It is outlined how indicators of wellbeing can be used to assess policies that integrate development and climate change policy objectives, and this approach is discussed in comparison with other work that rather have been inspired by sustainable development aspects of manmade, natural, and social capital. The experiences and results from case studies of development and climate that have done a first attempt to use human wellbeing indicators are reported and discussed. The studies include work from India, China, South Africa, Brazil, Bangladesh, and Senegal. A number of policy examples in the energy-, food-, and water sectors in these studies have shown up to demonstrate numerous linkages between development policies and climate change. Various analytical tools have been used in the studies including quantitative and qualitative scenario work as well as detailed micro-based analysis. The methodological conclusion that can be drawn from these studies, is that it is possible to apply wellbeing indicators to the more detailed policy assessment, but a link to more general national and regional scenario work is not yet established. Keywords: Development and climate change linkagesWellbeing indicatorsEnergy-, food-, and water security in developing countries Citedy By: 78 Climate change vulnerability and adaptation options for the coastal communities of Pakistan Author: KM Salik, S Jahangir,S ul Hasson Journal: Ocean & Coastal Management ,Vol.112(),2015--Pages Abstract: This study aims to explore climate change induced socio-economic vulnerability of mangrove-dependent communities in the Indus Delta. We evaluate the linkages between vulnerability indicators by relating a community perceptions with observed and projected climate change scenarios. In evaluating these linkages, some key questions are considered such as: what are the likely socio-economic drivers contributing to community's sensitivity? Are these drivers impacting the community and how much is the community's coping potential to climate change? What are the key adaptation options necessary for increasing the community's resilience? This study is carried out in a coastal town (Keti Bandar), which is located in the Indus delta. This region is highly sensitive to declining fresh water flows, changing climate and meager socio-economic resources of local population. We have used the Composite Vulnerability Index (CVI) approach in order to draw a general picture of the community's vulnerability under a changing climate in Keti Bandar. The data for three CVI components (exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity) are collected at household level through questionnaire-based survey in six villages, however for exposure, secondary data is also acquired. Our assessment shows that these coastal communities, either engaged with the fishery or agriculture sector, are not only exposed, but are also highly sensitive to climate change driven threats. Moreover, lack of access to basic facilities, inadequate income diversification, and low education levels are negatively affecting the adaptive capacity of the entire local population. However, the communities' nature of dwelling, their strong family networks, and their ability to migrate contribute positively to their adaptive capacity. Keywords: Composite Vulnerability Index Indus Delta Expos Citedy By: 16 Neogene climate change and emergence of C4grasses in the Namib, southwestern Africa, as reflected in ratite13C and18O Author: L Sgalen, M Renard,JA Lee-Thorp Journal: Earth and Planetary Science Letters ,Vol.344(3-4),2006--Pages Abstract: Stable light isotopes in ratite eggshells have been shown to be reliable indicators of shifts in climate and environmental conditions in the past. Here, we show thatd18O andd13C values in fossil and modern ratite eggshells collected in the aeolianite deposits of the southern and central Namib Desert track regional distinctions and global climate shifts throughout the Neogene.d18O values, although variable, are consistently higher in the central compared to the southern Namib throughout the record.d18O trends during the Miocene differ for the two regions, but track each other post-Miocene. Throughout the Miocene,d13C values for ratite eggshells from both the central and southern Namib regions are indistinguishable showing that the flora remained C3throughout. The overall negative (-3) shift in mean values for Miocene biostratigraphic zones is consistent with the response of C3photosynthesis topCO2shifts from 180 to 320ppmv as estimated from marine alkenone studies and/or evolution of thed13C of the atmospheric CO2. Evidence for C4plants occurs post-Miocene, with the development of the southern, winter rainfall and central/northern, summer rainfall zonation apparent today. These data provide independent corroboration that the expansion of C4-dominated ecosystems after ~7 Ma cannot be attributed to a reduction ofpCO2below a 500 ppmv threshold, as earlier proposed. Proliferation of C4plants in the Namib after ~5 Ma and, elsewhere, may be related rather to energy budgets and rainfall seasonality shifts resulting from large-scale atmospheric and oceanic circulation reorganisation. Keywords: Miocene ratite eggshells Namib Desert stable isotopes pCO2 C4expansion Citedy By: 51 Oxygen isotope evidence of climate change from pedogenic clay minerals in the Himalayan molasse Author: LA Stern,CP Chamberlain, RC Reynolds Journal: Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta,Vol.66(4),1997--Pages Abstract: In this study, we examine the oxygen isotope ratios of smectite and kaolinite in a stratigraphic sequence of paleosols in the Siwalik Himalayan molasse on the Potwar Plateau, northern Pakistan. There is a 34%o increase in the smectited18O values synchronous with a ~ 3.5%o increase ind18O values of pedogenic calcite at 8.56.5 Ma (previously observed by Quade et al., 1989). The covariation of thed18O values of smectite with calcitegd18O values through time strongly suggests a pedogenic origin of smectite and that itsd18O values reflect the oxygen isotope ratio of the soil water present during pedogenesis. These data show that thed18O values of clay minerals in paleosols in aggrading sedimentary sequences are viable paleoclimate indicators. Kaolinited18O values are similar to smectited18O values, as would be expected for pedogenic kaolinite, but there is greater variation in these data which we attribute to incomplete mineral separation. The measured permil oxygen isotope fractionation between calcite and smectite within individual paleosols is, on average, ~3%o higher than the equilibrium fractionation. This isotopic disequilibrium can be explained by the calcite forming predominantly during the dry winter season and the smectite forming predominantly during the wet summer season. The synchronous 3.5%o increase in oxygen isotope ratios of smectite and calcite at 8.56.5 Ma indicates that this18O/16O increase is not due to diagenesis, but rather results from a climate change. The most likely causes of the18O/16O increase in smectite and calcite are either increased aridity resulting in increased soil water evaporation (thus18O enrichment) and/or a change from more continental to more marine-sourced precipitation. The Tibetan Plateau, which is suggested to have undergone rapid uplift around 8 Ma (e.g., Harrison et al., 1992), may have acted as an effective orographic barrier to lowd18O precipitation originating from central Asia, causing higherd18O values of the precipitation falling on the Potwar Plateau. Currently it is impossible to distinguish between these two potential causes of the18O/16O increase at 8.56.5 Ma, but these clay minerald18Ovalues support that there was a significant climate change in this region. Keywords: Citedy By: 109 Climate Change Impacts on the Future Distribution of Date Palms: A Modeling Exercise Using CLIMEX Author: Lalit Kumar, Subhashni Taylor,Farzin Shabani Journal: PloS one, 2012,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: Climate is changing and, as a consequence, some areas that are climatically suitable for date palm (Phoenix dactyliferaL.) cultivation at the present time will become unsuitable in the future. In contrast, some areas that are unsuitable under the current climate will become suitable in the future. Consequently, countries that are dependent on date fruit export will experience economic decline, while other countries economies could improve. Knowledge of the likely potential distribution of this economically important crop under current and future climate scenarios will be useful in planning better strategies to manage such issues. This study used CLIMEX to estimate potential date palm distribution under current and future climate models by using one emission scenario (A2) with two different global climate models (GCMs), CSIRO-Mk3.0 (CS) and MIROC-H (MR). The results indicate that in North Africa, many areas with a suitable climate for this species are projected to become climatically unsuitable by 2100. In North and South America, locations such as south-eastern Bolivia and northern Venezuela will become climatically more suitable. By 2070, Saudi Arabia, Iraq and western Iran are projected to have a reduction in climate suitability. The results indicate that cold and dry stresses will play an important role in date palm distribution in the future. These results can inform strategic planning by government and agricultural organizations by identifying new areas in which to cultivate this economically important crop in the future and those areas that will need greater attention due to becoming marginal regions for continued date palm cultivation. Keywords: Citedy By: 49 Farmer beliefs and concerns about climate change and attitudes toward adaptation and mitigation: Evidence from Iowa Author: LoisWrightMorton,JonHobbs,J.GordonArbuckleJr., Journal: Climatic Change,Vol.118(3-4),2013--Pages Abstract: Agriculture is both vulnerable to climate change impacts and a significant source of greenhouse gases. Increasing agricultures resilience and reducing its contribution to climate change are societal priorities. Survey data collected from Iowa farmers are analyzed to answer the related research questions: (1) do farmers support adaptation and mitigation actions, and (2) do beliefs and concerns about climate change influence those attitudes. Results indicate that farmers who were concerned about the impacts of climate change on agriculture and attributed it to human activities had more positive attitudes toward both adaptive and mitigative management strategies. Farmers who believed that climate change is not a problem because human ingenuity will enable adaptations and who did not believe climate change is occurring or believed it is a natural phenomenona substantial percentage of farmerstended not to support mitigation Keywords: Citedy By: 84 Climate Change and Highland Malaria: Fresh Air for a Hot Debate Author: LuisFernando CJM Koenraadt Chaves Journal: Quarterly Review of Biology,Vol.85(1),2010--Pages Abstract: In recent decades, malaria has become established in zones at the margin of its previous distribution, especially in the highlands of East Africa. Studies in this region have sparked a heated debate over the importance of climate change in the territorial expansion of malaria, where positions range from its neglect to the reification of correlations as causes. Here, we review studies supporting and rebutting the role of climatic change as a driving force for highland invasion by malaria. We assessed the conclusions from both sides of the argument and found that evidence for the role of climate in these dynamics is robust. However, we also argue that over-emphasizing the importance of climate is misleading for setting a research agenda, even one which attempts to understand climate change impacts on emerging malaria patterns. We review alternative drivers for the emergence of this disease and highlight the problems still calling for research if the multidimensional nature of malaria is to be adequately tackled. We also contextualize highland malaria as an ongoing evolutionary process. Finally, we present Schmalhausen's law, which explains the lack of resilience in stressed systems, as a biological principle that unifies the importance of climatic and other environmental factors in driving malaria patterns across different spatio-temporal scales. Keywords: mosquito;Anopheles; time series; population dynamics; disease emergence; land use change Citedy By: 140 Climate change vulnerability, adaptation and risk perceptions at farm level in Punjab, Pakistan Author: M Abid, J Schilling,J Scheffran,F Zulfiqar Journal: Science of The Total Environment ,Vol.547(),2016--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is among the countries highly exposed and vulnerable to climate change. The country has experienced many severe floods, droughts and storms over the last decades. However, little research has focused on the investigation of vulnerability and adaptation to climate-related risks in Pakistan. Against this backdrop, this article investigates the farm level risk perceptions and different aspects of vulnerability to climate change including sensitivity and adaptive capacity at farm level in Pakistan. We interviewed a total of 450 farming households through structured questionnaires in three districts of Punjab province of Pakistan. This study identified a number of climate-related risks perceived by farm households such as extreme temperature events, insect attacks, animal diseases and crop pests. Limited water availability, high levels of poverty and a weak role of local government in providing proper infrastructure were the factors that make farmers more sensitive to climate-related risks. Uncertainty or reduction in crop and livestock yields; changed cropping calendars and water shortage were the major adverse impacts of climate-related risks reported by farmers in the study districts. Better crop production was reported as the only positive effect. Further, this study identified a number of farm level adaptation methods employed by farm households that include changes in crop variety, crop types, planting dates and input mix, depending upon the nature of the climate-related risks. Lack of resources, limited information, lack of finances and institutional support were some constraints that limit the adaptive capacity of farm households. This study also reveals a positive role of cooperation and negative role of conflict in the adaptation process. The study suggests to address the constraints to adaptation and to improve farm level cooperation through extended outreach and distribution of institutional services, particularly climate-specific farm advisory services Keywords: Citedy By: 14 Adaptation to climate change and its impacts on food productivity and crop income: Perspectives of farmers in rural Pakistan Author: M Abid,UA Schneider,J Scheffran Journal: Journal of Rural Studies ,Vol.47(1),2016--Pages Abstract: Evaluation of the ongoing efforts for farm level adaptation to climate change is crucial to understand their effectiveness and to suggest further actions at the policy level. The current study explores the adaptation of wheat farmers to climate change, its determinants and its impact on food productivity and crop income in rural Pakistan. This study is based on a primary dataset of 442 wheat farmers conducted through face-to-face structured interviews from 65 villages across three agro-ecological zones of Punjab Province, Pakistan. The study employs logistic regression analysis to find adaptation determinants and uses the propensity score matching technique to estimate the causal impact of adaptation on food productivity and crop income. The results of the study suggest that wheat farmers were well aware of climate change, but for various reasons did not adapt accordingly. The major adaptation strategies implemented by wheat farmers include changing planting dates, crop varieties and fertilizer types. Moreover, education, farming experience, access to agricultural extension, weather forecasting and marketing information were the factors that significantly affected farmers' adaptation decisions. Adapting wheat crops to climate change significantly and positively affects wheat productivity and net crop income and hence indirectly improves the farmers' wellbeing and local food security. More benefits were achieved by farmers who used a combination of different adaptation strategies. The study suggests to focus on farmers' education, easy access to farm advisory services and information on new adaptation methods for sustainable food production and local food security. Keywords: Climate change Adaptation Food productivity Crop income Rural Pakistan Citedy By: 8 Farmers' perceptions of and adaptation strategies to climate change and their determinants: the case of Punjab province, Pakistan Author: M. Abid, J. Scheffran, U. A. Schneider, and M. Ashfaq Journal: Earth System Dynamics ,Vol.6(1),2015--Pages Abstract: Climate change is a global environmental threat to all economic sectors, particularly the agricultural sector. Pakistan is one of the countries negatively affected by climate change due to its high exposure to extreme events and low adaptive capacity. In Pakistan, farmers are the primary stakeholders in agriculture and are more at risk due to climate vulnerability. Based on farm household data from 450 households collected from three districts in three agroecological zones in the Punjab province of Pakistan, this study examines how farmers perceive climate change and how they adapt their farming in response to perceived changes in climate. The results demonstrate that awareness of climate change is widespread throughout the area, and farm households make adjustments to adapt their agriculture in response to climatic change. Overall 58% of the farm households adapted their farming to climate change. Changing crop varieties, changing planting dates, planting of shade trees and changing fertilizers were the main adaptation methods implemented by farm households in the study area. The results from the binary logistic model reveal that education, farm experience, household size, land area, tenancy status, ownership of a tube well, access to market information, information on weather forecasting and agricultural extension services all influence farmers' choices of adaptation measures. The results also indicate that adaptation to climate change is constrained by several factors such as lack of information, lack of money, resource constraints and shortage of irrigation water in the study area. Findings of the study suggest the need for greater investment in farmer education and improved institutional setup for climate change adaptation to improve farmers' wellbeing. Keywords: Citedy By: 28 Construction of a 19611990 European climatology for climate change modelling and impact applications Author: M. Hulme, D. Conway, P. D. Jones,T. Jiang, E. M. Barrow, C. Turney Journal: International Journal of Climatology,Vol.15(12),1995--Pages Abstract: A 19611990 mean monthly climatology for a greater European region extending from 32W to 66E and from 25 to 81N has been constructed at a resolution of 0.5latitude by 0.5 longitude for a suite of nine surface climate variables: minimum, maximum, and mean air temperature; precipitation totals; sunshine hours; vapour pressure; wind speed; and (ground) frost day and rain day ( > 0.1 mm) frequencies. This climatology has been constructed from observed station data distributed across the region. Station frequencies range from 936 (wind speed) to 3078 (precipitation). Over 95 per cent of these data are based on observations between 1961 and 1990 and over 90 per cent were supplied by individual national meteorological agencies (NMAs) on specific request. For four variables, some standardization of the data had to be performed because different countries supplied data under different definitions. Thus cloud cover had to be converted to sunshine hours, relative humidity to vapour pressure, air frost days to ground frost days and rain days > 1 mm to rain days > 0.1 mm. The interpolation of the station data to the grid used elevation as one of the predictor variables and thus enabled three climate surfaces to be produced for each variable, reflecting the minimum, mean, and maximum elevation within each 0.5 by 0.5 cell. Subsets of stations were used for the interpolation of each variable, the selection being based on optimizing the spatial distribution, source priority and length of record. The accuracy of the various interpolations was assessed using validation sets of independent station data (i.e. those not used in the interpolation). Estimated mean absolute errors (MAE) ranged from under 4 per cent for vapour pressure to about 10 per cent for precipitation and up to 20 per cent for wind speed. The accuracy of the interpolated surfaces for minimum and maximum temperature was between 0.5C and 0.8C. We believe these results constitute the first climatology that has been constructed for this extensive European region at such a fine spatial resolution (0.5 by 0.5) from relatively dense station networks, for three different elevation surfaces and for a wide range of surface climate variables, all expressed with respect to a standard 30-year period. The climatology is already being used by researchers for applications in the areas of ecosystem modelling, climate change impact assessment and climate model validation, and is available from the authors. Keywords: Citedy By: 174 Construction of a 19611990 European climatology for climate change modelling and impact applications Author: M. Hulme,D. Conway,P. D. Jones,T. Jiang,E. M. Barrow,C. Turney, Journal: International Journal of Climatology,Vol.15(12),1995--Pages Abstract: A 19611990 mean monthly climatology for a greater European region extending from 32W to 66E and from 25 to 81N has been constructed at a resolution of 0.5latitude by 0.5 longitude for a suite of nine surface climate variables: minimum, maximum, and mean air temperature; precipitation totals; sunshine hours; vapour pressure; wind speed; and (ground) frost day and rain day ( > 0.1 mm) frequencies. This climatology has been constructed from observed station data distributed across the region. Station frequencies range from 936 (wind speed) to 3078 (precipitation). Over 95 per cent of these data are based on observations between 1961 and 1990 and over 90 per cent were supplied by individual national meteorological agencies (NMAs) on specific request. For four variables, some standardization of the data had to be performed because different countries supplied data under different definitions. Thus cloud cover had to be converted to sunshine hours, relative humidity to vapour pressure, air frost days to ground frost days and rain days > 1 mm to rain days > 0.1 mm. The interpolation of the station data to the grid used elevation as one of the predictor variables and thus enabled three climate surfaces to be produced for each variable, reflecting the minimum, mean, and maximum elevation within each 0.5 by 0.5 cell. Subsets of stations were used for the interpolation of each variable, the selection being based on optimizing the spatial distribution, source priority and length of record. The accuracy of the various interpolations was assessed using validation sets of independent station data (i.e. those not used in the interpolation). Estimated mean absolute errors (MAE) ranged from under 4 per cent for vapour pressure to about 10 per cent for precipitation and up to 20 per cent for wind speed. The accuracy of the interpolated surfaces for minimum and maximum temperature was between 0.5C and 0.8C. We believe these results constitute the first climatology that has been constructed for this extensive European region at such a fine spatial resolution (0.5 by 0.5) from relatively dense station networks, for three different elevation surfaces and for a wide range of surface climate variables, all expressed with respect to a standard 30-year period. The climatology is already being used by researchers for applications in the areas of ecosystem modelling, climate change impact assessment and climate model validation, and is available from the authors. Keywords: Citedy By: 174 Virtual water trade flows and savings under climate change Author: M. Konar1,2, Z. Hussein3 , N. Hanasaki4 , D. L. Mauzerall1,5, and I. Rodriguez-Iturbe1 Journal: Hydrology and Earth System Sciences;,Vol.17(8),2013--Pages Abstract: The international trade of food commodities links water and food systems, with important implications for both water and food security. The embodied water resources associated with food trade are referred to as virtual water trade. We present the first study of the impact of climate change on global virtual water trade flows and associated savings for the year 2030. In order to project virtual water trade and savings under climate change, it is essential to obtain projections of both bilateral crop trade and the virtual water content of crops in each country of production. We use the Global Trade Analysis Project model to estimate bilateral crop trade under changes in agricultural productivity for rice, soy, and wheat. We use the H08 global hydrologic model to determine the impact of climatic changes to crop evapotranspiration for rice, soy, and wheat in each country of production. Then, we combine projections of bilateral crop trade with estimates of virtual water content to obtain virtual water trade flows under climate change. We find that the total volume of virtual water trade is likely to go down under climate change, due to decreased crop trade from higher crop prices under scenarios of declining crop yields and due to decreased virtual water content under high agricultural productivity scenarios. However, the staple food trade is projected to save more water across most climate change scenarios, largely because the wheat trade re-organizes into a structure where large volumes of wheat are traded from relatively water-efficient exporters to less efficient importers Keywords: Citedy By: 64 Hydro-meteorological trends in the upper Indus River basin in Pakistan Author: M. Shahzad Khattak, M. S. Babel and M. Sharif Journal: Climate Research,Vol.46(2),2011--Pages Abstract: We examined trends in several hydro-meteorological variables in the upper Indus River basin (UIRB) in Pakistan. To represent the diversity of hydro-meteorological conditions in the basin, mean monthly data from 20 meteorological and 8 hydrometric stations were analyzed for detection of trends using the non-parametric Mann-Kendall test in combination with the trend-free pre-whitening approach for correcting time series data sets for serial correlation. Sen's slope method, a non-parametric alternative for estimating a slope for a univariate time series, was used to determine the magnitude of trends. The meteorological variables we considered were: minimum temperature, maximum temperature, and precipitation, whereas the hydrological variable considered was streamflow. For several of the variables, many more trends were identified than can be expected to occur by chance. Analysis of winter maximum temperature revealed an increasing trend with the trend in slopes of 1.79, 1.66, and 1.20C per 39 yr for the upper, middle, and lower regions, respectively. Precipitation trends were inconsistent and showed no definite pattern. Trends in streamflow were found to be related to increasing trends in mean maximum temperature, particularly in winter and spring seasons. Increased winter temperatures are likely to increase streamflow in winter and spring. During summer months streamflow will decrease and reduce the availability of water in the Tarbela Dam, thereby requiring changes in the reservoir operating policy towards more efficient management of available water. Keywords: Citedy By: 64 Climate change, flooding in South Asia and implications Author: M.MonirulQaderMirza Journal: Regional Environmental Change,Vol.11(1),2011--Pages Abstract: South Asia is one of the most flood vulnerable regions in the world. Floods occur often in the region triggered by heavy monsoon precipitation and can cause enormous damages to lives, property, crops and infrastructure. The frequency of extreme floods is on the rise in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. Past extreme floods fall within the range of climate variability but frequency, magnitude and extent flooding may increase in South Asia in future due to climate change. Flood risk is sensitive to different levels of warming. For example, in Bangladesh, analysis shows that most of the expected changes in flood depth and extent would occur between 0 and 2C warming. The three major rivers Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna/Barak will play similar roles in future flooding regimes as they are doing presently. Increases in future flooding can cause extensive damage to rice crops in the monsoon. This may have implications for food security especially of poor women and children. Floods can also impact public health in the flood plains and in the coastal areas. Keywords: Climate changeFloodingSouth AsiaCrop damageFood security Citedy By: 103 Climate change, flooding in South Asia and implications Author: M.MonirulQaderMirza, Journal: Regional Environmental Change,Vol.11(1),2011--Pages Abstract: South Asia is one of the most flood vulnerable regions in the world. Floods occur often in the region triggered by heavy monsoon precipitation and can cause enormous damages to lives, property, crops and infrastructure. The frequency of extreme floods is on the rise in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. Past extreme floods fall within the range of climate variability but frequency, magnitude and extent flooding may increase in South Asia in future due to climate change. Flood risk is sensitive to different levels of warming. For example, in Bangladesh, analysis shows that most of the expected changes in flood depth and extent would occur between 0 and 2C warming. The three major rivers Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna/Barak will play similar roles in future flooding regimes as they are doing presently. Increases in future flooding can cause extensive damage to rice crops in the monsoon. This may have implications for food security especially of poor women and children. Floods can also impact public health in the flood plains and in the coastal areas. Keywords: Climate changeFloodingSouth AsiaCrop damageFood security Citedy By: 103 Adaptive thermal comfort and sustainable thermal standards for buildings Author: M.A.HumphreysJ.F.Nicol Journal: Energy and Buildings ,Vol.34(6),2002--Pages Abstract: The origin and development of the adaptive approach to thermal comfort is explained. A number of recent developments in the application of the theory are considered and the origin of the differences between adaptive thermal comfort and the rational indices is explored. The application of the adaptive approach to thermal comfort standards is considered and recommendations made as to the best comfort temperature, the range of comfortable environments and the maximum rate of change of indoor temperature. The application of criteria of sustainability to thermal standards for buildings is also considered. Keywords: Comfort standards Thermal comfort Sustainability Adaptive approach Citedy By: 981 Snowmaking and Climate Change Author: Marius Mayer , , Robert Steiger Journal: Mountain Research and Development,Vol.28(3-4),2008--Pages Abstract: Winter tourism is highly sensitive to climate change. The sufficiently studied altitudinally dependent line of natural snow reliability is losing its relevance for skilift operators in Austria, where 59% of the ski area is covered by artificial snowmaking. But the diffusion of snowmaking facilities cannot be monocausally linked to climate change, as trends in tourism, prestige, and competitive advantage are important factors. Despite the fact that snowmaking is limited by climatological factors, skilift operators trust in technical improvements and believe the future will not be as menacing as assumed by recent climate change impact studies. The aim of the present study is to define reasons for the diffusion of snowmaking systems and to determine whether snowmaking can be a viable adaptation strategy despite ongoing warming, using a simple degree-day model. Results obtained with this method of assessing technical snow reliability show that current snowmaking intensity will not be sufficient to guarantee the desired 100-day season at elevations below 15001600 m. Snowmaking will still be possible climatically even at lower elevations, but the required intensification of capacity will lead to significantly higher operation costs. Keywords: Snowmaking,ski tourism,climate change,Alps,Austria Citedy By: 128 Accelerating extinction risk from climate change Author: MC Urban Journal: Science,Vol.348(6234),2015--Pages Abstract: Current predictions of extinction risks from climate change vary widely depending on the specific assumptions and geographic and taxonomic focus of each study. I synthesized published studies in order to estimate a global mean extinction rate and determine which factors contribute the greatest uncertainty to climate changeinduced extinction risks. Results suggest that extinction risks will accelerate with future global temperatures, threatening up to one in six species under current policies. Extinction risks were highest in South America, Australia, and New Zealand, and risks did not vary by taxonomic group. Realistic assumptions about extinction debt and dispersal capacity substantially increased extinction risks. We urgently need to adopt strategies that limit further climate change if we are to avoid an acceleration of global extinctions. Keywords: Citedy By: 222 Climate change and changes in global precipitation patterns: What do we know? Author: MHI Dore Journal: Environment International,Vol.31(8),2005--Pages Abstract: The objective of this paper is to synthesize the large literature recording changing patterns of precipitation in the observed data, thus indicating that climate change is already a reality. Such a synthesis is required not only for environmental researchers but also for policy makers. The key question is the broad picture at major regional and continental levels. Some interesting conclusions for this survey are emerging. For example, the review shows increased variance of precipitationeverywhere. Consistent with this finding, we observe that wet areas become wetter, and dry and arid areas become more so. In addition, the following general changing pattern is emerging: (a) increased precipitation in high latitudes (Northern Hemisphere); (b) reductions in precipitation in China, Australia and the Small Island States in the Pacific; and (c) increased variance in equatorial regions. The changes in the major ocean currents also appear to be affecting precipitation patterns. For example, increased intensity and frequency of El Nio and ENSO seem associated with evidence of an observed dipole pattern affecting Africa and Asia, although this time series is too short so far. But the changing pattern calls for renewed efforts at adaptation to climate change, as the changing precipitation pattern will also affect the regional availability of food supply. Keywords: Precipitation pattern Northern Hemisphere El Nio Citedy By: 497 Economic assessment of the impact of climate change on the agriculture of Pakistan Author: Mirza Nomman Ahmed, Michael Schmitz Journal: Business and Economic Horizons,Vol.(4),2011--Pages Abstract: Climate Change in Pakistan among others manifests itself in temperature increases, rainfall reduction in the arid plains and increases in the monsoon areas and last but not least, accelerated glacial melt. All these and other developments call for a deeper insight into the effects Recent Climate Change - or Weather Change has had on Pakistan in the course of the last 17 years. In this context the threats to food security remain one core issue to be investigated based on productivity analysis. This article studies how climate change affects the agricultural productivity in Pakistan`s four provinces Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan and the N.W.F.P., measured as weighted food crop yields per hectare, for the food crops wheat, rice and maize. By considering the RABI (Nov-Apr) growing season and including a measure for drought to capture the occurrence of extreme events, exacerbated through climate change, the proposed hypothesis is that changing climatic variables have reduced and are reducing the agricultural productivity and thus posing a threat to long term food security. To depict the effect of climate change, several control variables are introduced in a panel framework for intertemporal analysis. As a result, we should expect lower levels of productivity in the arid zones with greater climatic pressure and adverse effects on food security through lower agricultural yields. Keywords: Climate change; Pakistan; panel model; Citedy By: 10 Climate Change Risk and Reduction Approaches in Pakistan Author: MohammadAslamKhan, Journal: Disaster Risk Reduction Approaches in Pakistan,Vol.(),2014--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is one of the most vulnerable countries facing the risk of climate change, despite contributing very little to the global greenhouse gas emissions. The 2010 Global Climate Risk Index of Germanwatch ranked it first among some 180 nations of the world. The countrys vulnerabilities are high due to heavy dependence of its economy on agriculture, which is highly climate sensitive; water supply of its rivers from the Hindukush-Karakoram-Himalayan glaciers, which are reported to be receding due to global warming; and increased risks to its coastal areas (particularly to Karachi, its largest city and the hub of its industrial activity and international trade) and the Indus deltaic region due to sea level rise and increasing cyclonic activity. Compounding the problems are the extreme weather events, which have enhanced in their frequency and intensity in the country. An analysis of data from 52 meteorological stations in Pakistan over a 40-year period (19612000) shows that the frequency of highest daily temperature and heaviest rainfall events have increased by the passing decades. Moreover, at the turn of the century, the country experienced the worst drought of its history and in the first decade of the twenty-first century saw several extreme weather events including the historys worst flood in 2010. In terms of risks, climate change poses a major threat to all dimensions of sustainable development, economic, social as well as environmental. It is likely to have widespread impacts across various sectors and ecosystems such as food, water and energy; forests and biodiversity; coastal and marine environment; as well as on the occurrence and intensity of climate related hazards such as floods and droughts. This Chapter examines first the climate variability trends that Indicate continuous warming. It then evaluates vulnerabilities and risks posed by climate change, which are increasing with time particularly in terms of enhanced climate related hazards. Finally, it analyzes the key approaches and measures that have been adopted to reduce the risks posed by climate change. Keywords: Climate changeClimate variabilityVulnerability and riskObserved impactsResponse approaches Citedy By: 182 Climate Change and Mountain Topographic Evolution in the Central Karakoram, Pakistan Author: MP Bishop,ABG Bush,L Copland,U Kamp Journal: Annals of the Association of American Geographers ,Vol.100(4),2010--Pages Abstract: Mountain geodynamics represent highly scale-dependent interactions involving climate, tectonic, and surface processes. The central Karakoram in Pakistan exhibit strong climatetectonic feedbacks, although the detailed tectonic and topographic responses to climate perturbations need to be systematically explored. This study focuses on understanding climate variations in relation to glacier erosion and relief production. Field data, climate modeling, remote sensing, geomorphometry, geochronology, glaciology, and geomorphological assessment are utilized to characterize climate change and geomorphic response. Climate simulations suggest that the region has experienced significant climate change due to radiative forcing over at least the past million years due to changes in Earth's orbital configuration, as well as more temporally rapid climate dynamics related to the El Nio Southern Oscillation. Paleoclimate simulations support geomorphological evidence of multiple glaciations and long-term glacier retreat. Mesoscale relief patterns clearly depict erosion zones that are spatially coincident with high peaks and rapid exhumation. These patterns depict extreme spatial and temporal variability of the influence of glacier erosion in the topographic evolution of the region. Results support the interpretation of high-magnitude glacial erosion as a significant denudational agent in the exhumation of the central Karakoram. Consequently, a strong linkage is seen to occur between global, or at least hemispheric, climate change and the topographic evolution of the Karakoram and the western Himalaya. . Keywords: Karakoram,climate forcing,erosion,glaciation,landscape evolution Citedy By: 11 Implications of climate change in sustained agricultural productivity in South Asia Author: MurariLal, Journal: Regional Environmental Change,Vol.11(1),2011--Pages Abstract: One of the targets of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals adopted in 2000 is to cut in half the number of people who are suffering from hunger between 1990 and 2015. However, crop yield growth has slowed down in much of the world because of declining investments in agricultural research, irrigation, and rural infrastructure and increasing water scarcity. New challenges to food security are posed by accelerated climatic change. Considerable uncertainties remain as to when, where and how climate change will affect agricultural production. Even less is known about how climate change might influence other aspects that determine food security, such as accessibility of food for various societal groups and the stability of food supply. This paper presents the likely impacts of thermal and hydrological stresses as a consequence of projected climate change in the future potential agriculture productivity in South Asia based on the crop simulation studies with a view to identify critical climate thresholds for sustained food productivity in the region. The study suggests that, on an aggregate level, there might not be a significant impact of global warming on food production of South Asia in the short term (<2C; until 2020s), provided water for irrigation is available and agricultural pests could be kept under control. The increasing frequency of droughts and floods would, however, continue to seriously disrupt food supplies on year to year basis. In long term (2050s and beyond), productivity of Kharif crops would decline due to increased climate variability and pest incidence and virulence. Production of Rabi crops is likely to be more seriously threatened in response to 2C warming. The net cereal production in South Asia is projected to decline at least between 4 and 10% under the most conservative climate change projections (a regional warming of 3C) by the end of this century. In terms of the reference to UNFCCC Article 2 on dangerous anthropogenic (human-induced) interference with the climate system, the critical threshold for sustained food productivity in South Asia appears to be a rise in surface air temperature of ~2C and a marginal decline in water availability for irrigation or decrease in rainfall during the cropping season. Keywords: Climatic change and food securitySouth AsiaCrop simulation modelsNet cereal productionWater availability for irrigation Citedy By: 45 Climate Change in South Asia Author: MVK Sivakumar, R Stefanski Journal: Climate Change and Food Security in South Asia,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: South Asia, is home to over one fifth of the worlds population and is known to be the most disaster prone region in the world. The high rates of population growth, and natural resource degradation, with continuing high rates of poverty and food insecurity make South Asia one of the most vulnerable regions to the impacts of climate change. In general, past and present climate trends and variability in South Asia can be characterized by increasing air temperatures and there is an increasing trend in the intensity and frequency of extreme events in South Asia over the last century. Temperature projections for South Asia for the twenty-first century suggest a significant acceleration of warming over that observed in the twentieth century. Recent modelling experiments indicate that the warming would be significant in Himalayan Highlands including the Tibetan Plateau and arid regions of Asia. An increase in occurrence of extreme weather events including heat wave and intense precipitation events is projected in South Asia, along with an increase in the interannual variability of daily precipitation in the Asian summer monsoon. The projected impacts of climate change in South Asia will vary across sectors, locations and populations. Temperature rise will negatively impact crop yields in tropical parts of South Asia where these crops are already being grown close to their temperature tolerance threshold. While direct impacts are associated with rise in temperatures, indirect impacts due to water availability and changing soil moisture status and pest and disease incidence are likely to be felt. The most significant impacts are likely to be borne by small-holder rainfed farmers who constitute the majority of farmers in this region and possess low financial and technical capacity to adapt to climate variability and change. The projected impacts of climate change in different parts of South Asia are described. The coping capacity of the rural poor, especially in the marginal areas, is low and there is a need to mainstream the good practices for adaptation to climate change into sustainable development planning in the region. Improved understanding of the climate change impacts, vulnerability and the adaptation practices to cope with climate change could help this process. Keywords: Indian sub-continentMangrovesEl-NioENSORainfall variabilityProductivityFisheriesSea level rise Citedy By: 47 Institutional and technological innovation: Understanding agricultural adaptation to climate change in Nepal Author: N Chhetri,P Chaudhary, PR Tiwari, RB Yadaw Journal: Applied Geography ,Vol.33(),2012--Pages Abstract: History shows that farmers and their supporting institutions have been successful in introducing technological innovations to respond and adapt to environmental and socioeconomic challenges. Innovation itself is a mechanism by which society adapt to changing resource endowments, and which is in turn driven by social and cultural values. In the future, as resource conditions changes, the role of institutions in the process of technological innovations would be crucial to avoid deleterious consequences of climate change in agriculture. Using Nepal as a case, this paper illustrates how farmers and their supporting institutions are evolving and co-producing climate sensitive technologies on demand. Drawing upon the hypothesis of induced innovation, we examine the extent to which resource endowments have influenced the evolution of technological and institutional innovations in Nepals agricultural research and development. This study reveals that Nepal has developed a novel multilevel institutional partnership, including collaboration with farmers and other non-governmental organizations in recent years. More importantly, by combining conventional technological innovation process with the tacit knowledge of farmers, this new alliance has been instrumental in the innovation of location-specific technologies thereby facilitating the adoption of technologies in a more efficient manner. This alliance has improved knowledge network among institutions, scientists and farmers and enabled them to seek technologies that are responsive to likely changes in climate. Keywords: Climate change Adaptation Institutional innovation Technological change Nepal Citedy By: 75 Thermal comfort of outdoor spaces in Lahore, Pakistan: Lessons for bioclimatic urban design in the context of global climate change Author: N Mazhar,RD Brown,N Kenny,S Lenzholzer Journal: Landscape and Urban Planning ,Vol.138(),2015--Pages Abstract: Humans interact with urban microclimates through exchanges of energy. A surplus of energy can create thermal discomfort and be detrimental to human health. Many cities in warm regions all over the world are forecast to become very hot through global climate change. Some cities already experience extreme heat and have done so for centuries. We conducted a study of one such city in order to generate design guidelines for creating thermally comfortable outdoor places. In the hot, dry city of Lahore, Pakistan we compared the microclimates of two very different outdoor spaces. The first place was the 16th century Shalimar Garden, which contains much green infrastructure and water features. The other example was the hard-surfaced courtyard of the contemporary Alhamra Art Centre. In both places we measured the microclimatic characteristics and used those data to simulate thermal sensation through the energy-budget model COMFA. The measured air temperature and humidity in both spaces was similar. However, the solar radiation that would be received by a person in the Alhamra courtyard was much higher than in Shalimar Garden and was the main determinant of thermal discomfort. Results from this study can inform other cities in hot, dry climates about design responses that provide more outdoor thermal comfort and prevent health-threatening heat. Keywords: Landscape architecture Microclimate Energy budget Model Citedy By: 14 Species richness of migratory birds is influenced by global climate change Author: Nicole Lemoine,Hans-Christian Schaefer, Katrin Bhning-Gaese, Journal: Global Ecology and Biogeography,Vol.16(1),2017--Pages Abstract: AimGlobal climate change is increasingly influencing ecosystems. Long-term effects on the species richness and composition of ecological communities have been predicted using modelling approaches but, so far, hardly demonstrated in the field. Here, we test whether changes in the composition of bird communities have been influenced by recent climate change. LocationEurope. MethodsWe focus on the proportion of migratory and resident bird species because these groups are expected to respond differently to climatic change. We used the spatial relationship between climatic factors and bird communities in Europe to predict changes in 21 European bird communities under recent climate change. ResultsObserved changes corresponded significantly to predicted changes and could not be explained by the effects of spatial autocorrelation. Alternative factors such as changes in land use were tested in a first approximation as well but no effects were found. Main conclusionsThis study demonstrates that global climate change has already influenced the species richness and composition of European bird communities. Keywords: Citedy By: 84 Developing strategies for climate change : the UNEP country studies on climate change impacts and adaptations assessment Author: O'Brien, Karen Journal: Report/CICERO-Senter for klimaforskning,Vol.(),2000--Pages Abstract: This report summarizes four country studies that were undertaken as part of the UNEP "Country Case Studies on Climate Change Impacts and Adaptations Assessment." These studies, carried out in Antigua and Barbuda, Cameroon, Estonia, and Pakistan, were funded by the Global Environmental Facility and managed as a project of the UNEP Atmosphere Unit in Nairobi, Kenya. These country studies illustrate the importance of adopting a flexible approach to the assessment of climate change impacts and adaptations. While the UNEP Handbook on Methods served as a common reference for the study teams, each team found it necessary to adapt these methods - sometimes to a considerable extent - to meet the specific needs of the country. Moreover, two of the country studies (Estonia and Pakistan) were able to build on previous work on climate impacts, while the other two (Antigua and Barbuda and Cameroon) broke new ground. The studies provide a basic foundation for understanding the potential impacts of climate change and the adaptation measures necessary to address them. They indicate the scope of the problems in each of the countries studied, as well as the direction adaptation studies should take. Most importantly, they demonstrate that while each country has a unique set of problems and strategies, all countries will benefit from long-term sustainable development. Keywords: Citedy By: 29 Vulnerability to the impact of climate change on renewable groundwater resources: a global-scale assessment Author: P Dll Journal: Environmental Research Letters,Vol.8(12),2007--Pages Abstract: Climate change will lead to significant changes of groundwater recharge and thus renewable groundwater resources. Using the global water resources and use model WaterGAP, the impact of climate change on groundwater recharge and the number of affected people was computed for four climate scenarios by two climate models. Vulnerability of humans to decreased groundwater resources depends on both the degree of decrease and the sensitivity of the human system to the decrease. For each grid cell, a sensitivity index composed of a water scarcity indicator, an indicator for dependence of water supply on groundwater and the Human Development Index was quantified. Combining per cent groundwater recharge decrease with the sensitivity index, global maps of vulnerability to the impact of decreased groundwater recharge in the 2050s were derived. In the A2 (B2) emissions scenario, 18.419.3% (16.118.1%) of the global population of 10.7 (9.1) billion would be affected by groundwater recharge decreases of at least 10%, and 4.85.7% (3.83.8%) of the global population would be in the two highest vulnerability classes. The highest vulnerabilities are found at the North African rim of the Mediterranean Sea, in southwestern Africa, in northeastern Brazil and in the central Andes, which are areas of moderate to high sensitivity. For most of the areas with high population density and high sensitivity, model results indicate that groundwater recharge is unlikely to decrease by more than 10% until the 2050s. However, a fifth to a third of the population may be affected by a groundwater recharge increase of more than 10%, with negative impacts in the case of shallow water tables. The spatial distribution of vulnerability, even at the continental scale, differs more strongly between the two climate models than between the two emissions scenarios. Keywords: Citedy By: 214 Mapping hotspots of climate change and food insecurity in the global tropics Author: P Ericksen,PK Thornton,AMO Notenbaert, L Cramer Journal: Mapping hotspots of climate change and food insecurity in the global tropics ,Vol.(),2011--Pages Abstract: This study was coordinated by the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) to identify areas that are food insecure and vulnerable to the impacts of future climate change, across the priority regions for the CGIAR centres. The research was undertaken by a team of scientists from the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI). The study relied on maps: first, of variables that indicate the different aspects of food security (availability, access and utilization), and second, of thresholds of climate change exposure important for agricultural systems. Vulnerability was assessed using a domain approach based upon the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) framework of vulnerability as a function of exposure, sensitivity and coping capacity. Nine domains were identified; for each domain, areas of the tropics were classified by high or low exposure, high or low sensitivity, and high or low coping capacity. Keywords: Citedy By: 103 Climate change and food security Author: P Martens, RS Kovats, S Nijhof, P De Vries Journal: EnvironmentalChange,Vol.(),1999--Pages Abstract: Dynamic interactions between and within the biogeophysical and human environments lead to the production, processing, distribution, preparation and consumption of food, resulting in food systems that underpin food security. Food systems encompass food availability (production, distribution and exchange), food access (affordability, allocation and preference) and food utilization (nutritional and societal values and safety), so that food security is, therefore, diminished when food systems are stressed. Such stresses may be induced by a range of factors in addition to climate change and/or other agents of environmental change (e.g. conflict, HIV/AIDS) and may be particularly severe when these factors act in combination. Urbanization and globalization are causing rapid changes to food systems.Climate change may affect food systems in several ways ranging from direct effects on crop production (e.g. changes in rainfall leading to drought or flooding, or warmer or cooler temperatures leading to changes in the length of growing season), to changes in markets, food prices and supply chain infrastructure. The relative importance of climate change for food security differs between regions. For example, in southern Africa, climate is among the most frequently cited drivers of food insecurity because it acts both as an underlying, ongoing issue and as a short-lived shock. The low ability to cope with shocks and to mitigate long-term stresses means that coping strategies that might be available in other regions are unavailable or inappropriate. In other regions, though, such as parts of the Indo-Gangetic Plain of India, other drivers, such as labour issues and the availability and quality of ground water for irrigation, rank higher than the direct effects of climate change as factors influencing food security. Because of the multiple socio-economic and bio-physical factors affecting food systems and hence food security, the capacity to adapt food systems to reduce their vulnerability to climate change is not uniform. Improved systems of food production, food distribution and economic access may all contribute to food systems adapted to cope with climate change, but in adopting such changes it will be important to ensure that they contribute to sustainability. Agriculture is a major contributor of the greenhouse gases methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O), so that regionally derived policies promoting adapted food systems need to mitigate further climate change Keywords: Citedy By: 416 Late Cenozoic increase in accumulation rates of terrestrial sediment: How mightclimate changehave affected erosion rates? Author: P Molnar - Annu. Rev. Journal: Earth Planet. Sci., 2004,Vol.(32),2004--Pages Abstract: Accumulation rates of terrestrial sediment have increased in the past few million years both on and adjacent to continents, although not everywhere. Apparently, erosion has increased in elevated terrain regardless of when last tectonically active or what the present-day climate. In many regions, sediment coarsened abruptly in late Pliocene time. Sparser data suggest increased sedimentation rates at ~15 Ma, approximately when oxygen isotopes in benthic foraminifera imply high-latitude cooling. If climate change effected accelerated erosion, understanding how it did so remains the challenge. Some obvious candidates, such as lowered sea level leading to erosion of continental shelves or increased glaciation, account for increased sedimentation in some, but not all, areas. Perhaps stable climates that varied slowly allowed geomorphic processes to maintain a state of equilibrium with little erosion until ~34 Ma, when large oscillations in climate with periods of 20,00040,000 years developed and denied the landscape the chance to reach equilibrium. Keywords: uplift of mountain ranges,processes of erosion,orbital controls of climatic change,paleoclimate,glacial erosion Citedy By: 302 Adapting food systems of the Indo-Gangetic plains to global environmental change: key information needs to improve policy formulation Author: P.K. Joshib, J.S.I. Ingramc,R.K. Gupta,P.K. Aggarwalad Journal: Environmental Science & Policy,Vol.7(6),2004--Pages Abstract: The Indo-Gangetic plain (IGP; including regions of Pakistan, India, Nepal, and Bangladesh) is generally characterised by fertile soils, favourable climate and an abundant supply of water. Nevertheless, the challenge of increasing food production in the IGP in line with demand grows ever greater; any perturbation in agriculture will considerably affect the food systems of the region and increase the vulnerability of the resource-poor population. Increasing regional production is already complicated by increasing competition for land resources by non-agricultural sectors and by the deterioration of agri-environments and water resources. Global environmental change (GEC), especially changes in climate mean values and variability, will further complicate the agricultural situation and will therefore, have serious implications for food systems of the region. Strategies to reduce the vulnerability of the region's food systems to GEC need to be based on a combination of technical and policy options, and developed in recognition of the concurrent changes in socioeconomic stresses. Adaptation options need to be assessed with regard to their socioeconomic and environmental efficacy, but a greater understanding of the interactions of food systems with GEC is needed to be able to do this with confidence. This paper discusses information needs relating to resource management and policy support to guide the development of research planning for increasing the robustness of IGP food systems to GEC. Further information is needed to develop a range of adaptation strategies including augmenting production and its sustainability, increasing income from agricultural enterprises, diversification from ricewheat systems, improving land use and natural resource management, and instigating more flexible policies and institutions. Keywords: Indo-Gangetic plain; GEC; Food systems; Adaptation Citedy By: 203 Holocene climate variability Author: PA Mayewski,EE Rohling, JC Stager, W Karln Journal: Quaternary Research ,Vol.62(3),2004--Pages Abstract: Although the dramatic climate disruptions of the last glacial period have received considerable attention, relatively little has been directed toward climate variability in the Holocene (11,500 cal yr B.P. to the present). Examination of ~50 globally distributed paleoclimate records reveals as many as six periods of significant rapid climate change during the time periods 90008000, 60005000, 42003800, 35002500, 12001000, and 600150 cal yr B.P. Most of the climate change events in these globally distributed records are characterized by polar cooling, tropical aridity, and major atmospheric circulation changes, although in the most recent interval (600150 cal yr B.P.), polar cooling was accompanied by increased moisture in some parts of the tropics. Several intervals coincide with major disruptions of civilization, illustrating the human significance of Holocene climate variability. Keywords: Climate Rapid climate change Holocene Solar variability Citedy By: 1604 Vulnerability and Climate Change: An Analysis of the Eastern Coastal Districts of India Author: Patnaik, UnmeshandNarayanan, K. Journal: Vulnerability and Climate Change: An Analysis of the Eastern Coastal Districts of India ,Vol.(),2009--Pages Abstract: This paper attempts to construct a picture of socioeconomic context of vulnerability by focusing on indicators that measure both the state of development of the region as well as its capacity to progress further. The first aspect is reflected through agricultural and industrial development, while the second through infrastructure and others. In this study, the climate change impacts are examined from agriculture, infrastructure and demographic characteristics. The analysis is carried out at the district level. Vulnerability of a particular district is measured by the frequency of occurrence of extreme events, in this case the occurrence of cyclones, storms and depressions. From the data on the frequency of occurrence of extreme events it is clear that the districts in the states of Orissa and Andhra Pradesh are highly vulnerable than the other states. The study aims to build a vulnerability index and rank the various coastal districts of these highly vulnerable states in terms of their performance on the index. The index tries to capture a comprehensive scale of vulnerability by including many indicators that serve as proxies. The analysis carried out in this paper points out that the clusters of districts of poor infrastructure and demographic development are also the regions of maximum vulnerability. Some districts exhibit very low rate of growth in infrastructure, alongside a high growth rate of population. Also these districts show a higher density of population. Hence any occurrence of extreme events is likely to be more catastrophic in nature for the people living in these districts. People living in absolute poverty [those who cannot afford US $2 a day] will not be able to cope up with the challenges posed by climate change. Therefore, the analysis carried out in this paper suggests that climate change policies have to be integrated with sustainable development strategies in general, and poverty alleviation measures, in particular. Keywords: Vulnerability, Climate Change, IPCC, India Citedy By: 62 Climate Change, Mass Migration and the Military Response Author: Paul J.Smith Journal: Orbis ,Vol.51(4),2007--Pages Abstract: The displacement of thousands of U.S. Gulf Coast residents in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina is emblematic of a human migration challenge that will likely become more severe in the years and decades ahead. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) predicts that climate change will manifest in dramatic ways-extreme weather events, droughts, heat waves, increased cyclone (hurricane, typhoon) activity, sea level rise, etc.-and some of these effects may induce large scale human migration, both within and among countries. The increasing trend of environmental migrants is clashing with widespread anti-immigrant sentiment in both developed and developing countries around the world. Some countries are describing migration-and particularly unauthorized international migration-as a security threat and are turning to military forces to deter or manage the human flows, a trend that is likely to grow. Keywords: Citedy By: 92 Business and climate change risk: a regional time series analysis Author: PeterRomilly, Journal: Journal of International Business Studies,Vol.38(3),2007--Pages Abstract: International business activity has to adapt to a number of new challenges, including higher temperatures and flood risks. The adaptation process will depend partly on the development of new forms of risk analysis for decision-making. This paper identifies statistically significant differences in regional temperature risk profiles, and develops climate change risk rankings for 11 regions of the globe. The methodology is based on a univariate time series analysis of regional mean temperatures, and takes into account the extent to which extreme temperature events cluster together, an important factor in weather-related risk analysis. The implications of the empirical results are discussed, with particular reference to the insurance and reinsurance markets. Keywords: climate change,risktime series analysis Citedy By: 35 Impact of Climate Change and Variability on Irrigation Requirements: A Global Perspective Author: PetraDll Journal: Climatic Change,Vol.54(3),2002--Pages Abstract: Anthropogenic climate change does not only affect water resources but also water demand. Future water and food security will depend, among other factors, on the impact of climate change on water demand for irrigation. Using a recently developed global irrigation model, with a spatial resolution of 0.5 by 0.5, we present the first global analysis of the impact of climate change and climate variability on irrigation water requirements. We compute how long-term average irrigation requirements might change under the climatic conditions of the 2020s and the 2070s, as provided by two climate models, and relate these changes to the variations in irrigation requirements caused by long-term and interannual climate variability in the 20th century. Two-thirds of the global area equipped for irrigation in 1995 will possibly suffer from increased water requirements, and on up to half of the total area (depending on the measure of variability), the negative impact of climate change is more significant than that of climate variability. Keywords: Citedy By: 417 Climate change, hydrology, and water resources Author: PH Gleick Journal: Reviews of Geophysics,Vol.27(3),1989--Pages Abstract: Growing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other trace gases are leading to climatic changes with important implications for the hydrologic balance and water resources. These greenhouse gases are expected to alter the radiative balance of the atmosphere, causing increases in temperature and changes in many other climatic variables. Recent hydrological research strongly suggests that this so-called greenhouse effect will alter the timing and magnitude of runoff and soil moisture, change lake levels, and affect water quality. Such changes raise the possibility of environmental and socioeconomic dislocations, and they have important implications for future water resources planning and management. This paper reviews state-of-the-art research into the implications of climatic changes for the hydrologic cycle and for water resources and discusses the implications of such changes for future water planning and management. Keywords: Citedy By: 290 Country stakes in climate change negotiations: two dimensions of vulnerability Author: PIET BUYS,UWE DEICHMANN,CRAIG MEISNER,THAO TON THAT&DAVID WHEELER, Journal: Journal Climate Policy ,Vol.9(3),2009--Pages Abstract: Future global agreements on reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are likely to include developing countries and industrialized countries that are not part of the Kyoto Protocol. An assessment using a comprehensive geo-referenced database of indicators relating to global change and energy provides insight into countries' likely attitudes and positions with respect to international treaties regulating carbon emissions. A distinction is made between source vulnerabilities (access to fossil fuels and renewable energy sources, options for GHG sequestration, the potential size of employment and income shocks) and impact vulnerabilities (changes in agricultural productivity, weather events and sea-level rise). This differential vulnerability is used to identify clear differences that determine likely negotiating positions. This helps us to understand the incentives required to make the establishment of such agreements more likely. Countries with high impact vulnerability and low source vulnerability should be the most inclined to support greenhouse gas emissions limits. Conversely, countries with high source vulnerability and low impact vulnerability should be most resistant to such limits. Additionally, a successful transition to clean energy sources will require transition support for countries with high source vulnerability and adaptation support for countries with high impact vulnerability. Keywords: climate change,emission reduction,energy resources,negotiations,post-2012,vulnerability Citedy By: 42 Climate Change and Human Health Author: PR Epstein Journal: New England Journal of Medicine,Vol.(),2005--Pages Abstract: In 1998, Hurricane Mitch dropped six feet of rain on Central America in three days. In its wake, the incidence of malaria, dengue fever, cholera, and leptospirosis soared. In 2000, rain and three cyclones inundated Mozambique for six weeks, and the incidence of malaria rose fivefold. In 2003, a summer heat wave in Europe killed tens of thousands of people, wilted crops, set forests ablaze, and melted 10 percent of the Alpine glacial mass. This summer's blistering heat wave was unprecedented with regard to intensity, duration, and geographic extent. More than 200 U.S. cities registered new record high temperatures. In Phoenix, Arizona, sustained temperatures above 100F (38C) for 39 consecutive days, including a week above 110F (43C), took a harsh toll on the homeless. Then cameHurricane Katrina, gathering steam from the heated Gulf of Mexico and causing devastation in coastal communities. Keywords: Citedy By: 267 Climate change and waterborne and vector-borne disease Author: PR Hunter Journal: Journal of applied microbiology,Vol.94(1),2003--Pages Abstract: This paper considers the potential impact on human health from waterborne and vector-borne infections. It concentrates on the impact of two possible changes to climate; increased frequency of heavy rainfall events, with associated flooding and increased temperature. Flooding is associated with increased risk of infection in developing nations but not in the West unless water sources are compromised. There have been numerous reported of outbreaks that followed flooding that led to contamination of underground sources of drinking water. Heavy rainfall also leads to deterioration in the quality of surface waters that could adversely affect the health of those engaged in recreational water contact. It is also concluded that there may be an increase in the number of cyanobacterial blooms because of a combination of increased nutrient concentrations and water temperature. It is considered unlikely that climate change will lead to an increase in disease linked to mains drinking water, although private supplies would be at risk from increased heavy rainfall events. Although increased temperature could lead to climatic conditions favourable to increases in certain vector-borne diseases such as malaria, the infrastructure in the UK would prevent the indigenous spread of malaria. Keywords: Citedy By: 389 Adaptation to climate change of wheat growing in South Australia: Analysis of management and breeding strategies Author: Q Luo,W Bellotti, M Williams,E Wang Journal: Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment ,Vol.129(1-3),2009--Pages Abstract: Evaluation of adaptive management options is very crucial for successfully dealing with negative climate change impacts. Research objectives of this study were (1) to determine the proper N application rate for current practice, (2) to select a range of synthetic wheat (Triticum aestivumL.) cultivars to expand the existing wheat cultivar pool for adaptation purpose, (3) to quantify the potential impacts of climate change on wheat grain yield and (4) to evaluate the effectiveness of three common management options such as early sowing, changing N application rate and use of different wheat cultivars derived in (2) and given in the APSIM-Wheat model package in dealing with the projected negative impacts for Keith, South Australia. The APSIM-Wheat model was used to achieve these objectives. It was found that 75kgha-1N application at sowing for current situation is appropriate for the study location. This provided a non-limiting N supply condition for climate change impact and adaptation evaluation. Negative impacts of climate change on wheat grain yield were projected under both high (-15%) and low (-10%) plant available water capacity conditions. Neither changes in N application level nor in wheat cultivar alone nor their synergistic effects could offset the negative climate change impact. It was found that early sowing is an effective adaptation strategy when initial soil water was reset at 25mm at sowing but this may be hard to realise especially since a drier environment is projected. Keywords: Wheat grain yield Climate change Impact assessment Adaptation evaluation Early sowing Cultivars choices N application level Citedy By: 83 Socioeconomic Vulnerability and Adaptation to Environmental Risk: A Case Study of Climate Change and Flooding in Bangladesh Author: R Brouwer,S Akter,L Brander, E Haque - Journal: Risk analysis, ,Vol.27(2),2007--Pages Abstract: In this article we investigate the complex relationship between environmental risk, poverty, and vulnerability in a case study carried out in one of the poorest and most flood-prone countries in the world, focusing on household and community vulnerability and adaptive coping mechanisms. Based upon the steadily growing amount of literature in this field we develop and test our own analytical model. In a large-scale household survey carried out in southeast Bangladesh, we ask almost 700 floodplain residents living without any flood protection along the River Meghna about their flood risk exposure, flood problems, flood damage, and coping mechanisms. Novel in our study is the explicit testing of the effectiveness of adaptive coping strategies to reduce flood damage costs. We show that, households with lower income and less access to productive natural assets face higher exposure to risk of flooding. Disparity in income and asset distribution at community level furthermore tends to be higher at higher risk exposure levels, implying that individually vulnerable households are also collectively more vulnerable. Regarding the identification of coping mechanisms to deal with flood events, we look at both theex antehousehold level preparedness for flood events and theex postavailability of community-level support and disaster relief. We find somewhat paradoxically that the people that face the highest risk of flooding are the least well prepared, both in terms of household-levelex antepreparedness and community-levelex postflood relief. Keywords: Citedy By: 314 Climate Change and Asias Coastal Urban Cities Author: R Fuchs, M Conran, E Louis Journal: Environment and Urbanization Asia,Vol.2(1),2011--Pages Abstract: The scientific literature has documented the growing risks of flooding posed for Asias coastal cities by the combination of climate change, as reflected in sea level rise and intensified storms and storm surges, and ongoing urban growth in low-lying coastal zones. These issues were already elaborated in the 2007 IPCC (IPCC, 2007) reports but recent studies indicate that climate change, sea level rise and the sinking of the deltas on which most Asian mega urban regions have arisen, are all occurring at much faster rates than earlier projected and therefore pose even greater risks than previously indicated. Global warming appears to be accelerating and may increase to 4 C or more by the end of this century, twice the earlier IPCC projections. The sea level is now expected to rise by one meter or more by 2100; two or three times the earlier projections. The recent typhoons and rains striking Southeast Asia have been the most intense in decades as would be expected as a result of global warming. At the same time, Asias urban population is increasing at the rate of 140,000 per day, with much of this growth occurring in low-lying coastal regions and on deltas characterized by land subsidence that is further contributing to flooding risks. While these risks and vulnerabilities have been increasingly detailed in the scientific literature, recognition and effective responses on the part of the urban planning and policy community have been slow to develop. Barriers to adaptation, policy formation and response are reviewed and possible steps forward are outlined Keywords: Citedy By: 34 Social and economic impacts of climate change on the urban environment Author: R Gasper, A Blohm,M Ruth Journal: Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability ,Vol.3(3),2011--Pages Abstract: Urban areas have unique characteristics that render their residents and assets particularly vulnerable to climate change. Many large urban centers are located along coasts or in low-lying areas around the mouths of major rivers, placing economic capital and human populations at risk of climate-related hazards including sea level rise and flooding from severe precipitation. Recent literature illustrates the economic and social challenges facing cities around the world as a result of climate change including energy shortages, damaged infrastructure, increasing losses to industry, heat-related mortality and illness, and scarcity of food and water. These challenges are interrelated. Economic losses make it difficult for residents to maintain their livelihoods and can therefore exacerbate social issues including poverty and hunger. At the same time, some demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of cities can make them especially vulnerable to climate change impacts. This paper reviews current literature on these issues and identifies future research needed to more fully understand climate change in the urban context. Keywords: Citedy By: 73 Responses of crop yield and water use efficiency to climate change in the North China Plain Author: R Guo, Z Lin, X Mo,C Yang Journal: Agricultural Water Management ,Vol.97(8),2010--Pages Abstract: Based on future climate change projections offered by IPCC, the responses of yields and water use efficiencies of wheat and maize to climate change scenarios are explored over the North China Plain. The climate change projections of 21st century under A2A, B2A and A1B are from HadCM3 global climate model. A climate generator (CLIGEN) is applied to generate daily weather data of selected stations and then the data is used to drive CERES-Wheat and Maize models. The impacts of increased temperature and CO2on wheat and maize yields are inconsistent. Under the same scenario, wheat yield ascended due to climatic warming, but the maize yield descended. As a more probable scenario, climate change under B2A is moderate relative to A2A and A1B. Under B2A in 2090s, average wheat yield and maize yield will respectively increase 9.8% and 3.2% without CO2fertilization in this region. High temperature not only affects crop yields, but also has positive effect on water use efficiencies, mainly ascribing to the evapotranspiration intensification. There is a positive effect of CO2enrichment on yield and water use efficiency. If atmospheric CO2concentration reaches nearly 600ppm, wheat and maize yields will increase 38% and 12% and water use efficiencies will improve 40% and 25% respectively, in comparison to those without CO2fertilization. However, the uncertainty of crop yield is considerable under future climate change scenarios and whether the CO2fertilization may be realized is still needed further research. Keywords: Climate generator model (CLIGEN) Crop yield Climate change scenario CERES model Citedy By: 135 Addressing human vulnerability to climate change: Toward a no-regrets approach Author: R Heltberg, PB Siegel, SL Jorgensen Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.19(1),2009--Pages Abstract: This paper presents and applies a conceptual framework to address human vulnerability to climate change. Drawing upon social risk management and asset-based approaches, the conceptual framework provides a unifying lens to examine links between risks, adaptation, and vulnerability. The result is an integrated approach toincrease the capacity of society to manage climate risks with a view to reduce the vulnerability of households and maintain or increase the opportunities for sustainable development.We identify no-regrets adaptation interventions, meaning actions that generate net social benefits under all future scenarios of climate change and impacts. We also make the case for greater support for community-based adaptation and social protection and propose a research agenda. Keywords: Adaptation Climate change Social risk management Vulnerability Citedy By: 418 Chapter 3 Regional Vulnerability of Climate Change Impacts on Asian Rice Production and Scope for Adaptation Author: R Wassmann,SVK Jagadish, K Sumfleth,H Pathak Journal: Advances in Agronomy,Vol.102(),2009--Pages Abstract: Rice is the principle staple crop of Asia and any deterioration of rice production systems through climate change would seriously impair food security in this continent. This review assesses spatial and temporal vulnerabilities of different rice production systems to climate change impacts in Asia. Initially, the review discusses the risks of increasing heat stress and maps the regions where current temperatures are already approaching critical levels during the susceptible stages of the rice plant, namely Pakistan/north India (Oct.), south India (April, Aug.), east India/Bangladesh (March-June), Myanmar/Thailand/Laos/Cambodia (March-June), Vietnam (April/Aug.), Philippines (April/June), Indonesia (Aug.) and China (July/Aug.). Possible adaptation options for heat stress are derived from regions where the rice crop is already exposed to very high temperatures including Iran and Australia. Drought stress is also expected to aggravate through climate change; a map superimposing the distribution of rainfed rice and precipitation anomalies in Asia highlights especially vulnerable areas in east India/Bangladesh and Myanmar/Thailand.Then, the review gives emphasis to two rice growing environments that have outstanding importance for food supply in Asia and, at the same time, are particularly vulnerable to climate impacts. The mega-deltas in Vietnam, Myanmar and Bangladesh are the backbone of the rice economy in the respective country and will experience specific climate change impacts due to sea level rise. Significant improvements of the rice production systems, that is, higher resilience to flooding and salinity, are crucial for maintaining or even increasing yield levels in these very productive deltaic regions. The other hotspot with especially high climate change risks in Asia is the Indo-Gangetic Plains (IGP) which will be affected by the melting of the Himalayan glaciers. The dominant land use type in the IGP is rice-wheat rotation, and we discuss specific vulnerabilities and possible adaptation options in the different sub-regions of the IGP. We conclude that geo-spatial vulnerability assessments may become crucial for planning targeted adaptation programs, but that policy frameworks are needed for their implementation. Keywords: Citedy By: 207 South Asian summer monsoon precipitation variability: Coupled climate model simulations and projections under IPCC AR4 Author: R. H.Kripalani,J. H.Oh,A.Kulkarni,S. S.Sabade,H. S.Chaudhari, Journal: Theoretical and Applied Climatology,Vol.90(3-4),2007--Pages Abstract: South Asian summer monsoon precipitation and its variability are examined from the outputs of the coupled climate models assessed as part of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment. Out of the 22 models examined, 19 are able to capture the maximum rainfall during the summer monsoon period (June through September) with varying amplitude. While two models are unable to reproduce the annual cycle well, one model is unable to simulate the summer monsoon season. The simulated inter-annual variability from the 19 models is examined with respect to the mean precipitation, coefficient of variation, long-term trends and the biennial tendency. The model simulated mean precipitation varies from 500?mm to 900?mm and coefficient of variation from 3 to 13%. While seven models exhibit long-term trends, eight are able to simulate the biennial nature of the monsoon rainfall. Six models, which generate the most realistic 20th century monsoon climate over south Asia, are selected to examine future projections under the doubling CO2scenario. Projections reveal a significant increase in mean monsoon precipitation of 8% and a possible extension of the monsoon period based on the multi-model ensemble technique. Extreme excess and deficient monsoons are projected to intensify. The projected increase in precipitation could be attributed to the projected intensification of the heat low over northwest India, the trough of low pressure over the Indo-Gangetic plains, and the landocean pressure gradient during the establishment phase of the monsoon. The intensification of these pressure systems could be attributed to the decline in winter/spring snowfall. Furthermore, a decrease of winter snowfall over western Eurasia is also projected along with an increase of winter snowfall over Siberia/eastern Eurasia. This projected dipole snow configuration during winter could imply changes in mid-latitude circulation conducive to subsequent summer monsoon precipitation activity. An increase in precipitable water of 1216% is projected over major parts of India. A maximum increase of about 2024% is found over the Arabian Peninsula, adjoining regions of Pakistan, northwest India and Nepal. Although the projected summer monsoon circulation appears to weaken, the projected anomalous flow over the Bay of Bengal (Arabian Sea) will support oceanic moisture convergence towards the southern parts of India and Sri Lanka (northwest India and adjoining regions). The ENSO-Monsoon relationship is also projected to weaken. Keywords: Citedy By: 243 Bunyaviruses and climate change Author: R. M. Elliott, Journal: Clinical Microbiology and Infection, 2009,Vol.15(6),2009--Pages Abstract: It is generally accepted that the planet is undergoing climatic changes, and climate change has become the scapegoat for many catastrophes, including infectious disease outbreaks, as acknowledged by Randolph and Ergonul, who state Climate change is the current ubiquitous explanation for increased incidence of infections of many sorts (Future Virology2008;3: 303306). However, as these authors argue, this is a highly simplistic view and, indeed, there is a complex network of factors that are responsible for disease emergence and re-emergence. In this short review, the role that climate change could play in the emergence of bunyavirus disease is considered, using a few selected examples. Keywords: Citedy By: 48 Early effects of climate change: do they include changes in vector-borne disease? Author: R. S.Kovats,D. H.Campbell-Lendrum,A. J.McMichel,A.Woodward,J. St H.Cox Journal: Society of the Royal, 2001,Vol.(),2001--Pages Abstract: The world's climate appears now to be changing at an unprecedented rate. Shifts in the distribution and behaviour of insect and bird species indicate that biological systems are already responding to this change. It is well established that climate is an important determinant of the spatial and temporal distribution of vectors and pathogens. In theory, a change in climate would be expected to cause changes in the geographical range, seasonality (intraannual variability), and in the incidence rate (with or without changes in geographical or seasonal patterns). The detection and then attribution of such changes to climate change is an emerging task for scientists. We discuss the evidence required to attribute changes in disease and vectors to the early effects of anthropogenic climate change. The literature to date indicates that there is a lack of strong evidence of the impact of climate change on vectorborne diseases (i.e. malaria, dengue, leishmaniasis, tickborne diseases). New approaches to monitoring, such as frequent and longterm sampling along transects to monitor the full latitudinal and altitudinal range of specific vector species, are necessary in order to provide convincing direct evidence of climate change effects. There is a need to reassess the appropriate levels of evidence, including dealing with the uncertainties attached to detecting the health impacts of global change. Keywords: Citedy By: 351 Cretaceous and Tertiary climate change and the past distribution of megathermal rainforests Author: R.J.Morley, Journal: Tropical rainforest responses to climatic change,Vol.(),2011--Pages Abstract: The history of megathermal (currently tropical) rainforests over the last 30 kyr is now becoming relatively well-understood, as demonstrated by the many contributions in this volume. However, our perception of their longer-term history remains highly fragmentary. There is a real need for a better understanding of rainforest history on an evolutionary time scale, not only to have a better idea of the biological, geological, and climatic factors which have led to the development of the most diverse ecosystem ever to have developed on planet Earth, but also since the implications of rainforest history on an evolutionary time scale are inextricably linked to a plethora of other issues currently receiving wide attention. Determining the place and time of origin and/or radiation of angiosperms (which overwhelmingly dominate present day megathermal rainforests), establishing patterns of global climate change, clarifying the nature of global temperature gradients through time, understanding the successive switching from greenhouse to icehouse climates, global warming, patterns of dispersal of megathermal plants and animals, higher rank (ordinal) taxonomy and the nature of controls on global diversity gradients are but some issues which are being clarified with the better understanding of the long-term history of megathermal rainforests. Keywords: Citedy By: 117 Inside UN Climate Change Negotiations: The Copenhagen Conference Author: Radoslav S. Dimitrov Journal: Review of policy research,,Vol.27(6),2010--Pages Abstract: UN negotiations on climate change entail a fundamental transformation of the global economy and constitute the single most important process in world politics. This is an account of the 2009 Copenhagen summit from the perspective of a government delegate. The article offers a guide to global climate negotiations, tells the story of Copenhagen from behind closed doors, and assesses the current state of global climate governance. It outlines key policy issues under negotiation, the positions and policy preferences of key countries and coalitions, the outcomes of Copenhagen, and achievements and failures in climate negotiations to date. The Copenhagen Accord is a weak agreement designed to mask the political failure of the international community to create a global climate treaty. However, climate policy around the world is making considerable progress. While the UN negotiations process is deadlocked, multilevel climate governance is thriving. Keywords: Citedy By: 126 Inside UN Climate Change Negotiations: The Copenhagen Conference Author: Radoslav S. Dimitrov, Journal: Review of policy research,,Vol.27(6),2010--Pages Abstract: UN negotiations on climate change entail a fundamental transformation of the global economy and constitute the single most important process in world politics. This is an account of the 2009 Copenhagen summit from the perspective of a government delegate. The article offers a guide to global climate negotiations, tells the story of Copenhagen from behind closed doors, and assesses the current state of global climate governance. It outlines key policy issues under negotiation, the positions and policy preferences of key countries and coalitions, the outcomes of Copenhagen, and achievements and failures in climate negotiations to date. The Copenhagen Accord is a weak agreement designed to mask the political failure of the international community to create a global climate treaty. However, climate policy around the world is making considerable progress. While the UN negotiations process is deadlocked, multilevel climate governance is thriving. Keywords: Citedy By: 126 Chapter 1 Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction: An Asian perspective Author: Rajib Shaw,, Juan M. Pulhin,, Joy Jacqueline Pereira, Journal: Book Series: Community, Environment and Disaster Risk Management ,Vol.5(),2010--Pages Abstract: Climate change is one of the biggest challenges to development. Intergovernmental Committee in response to Climate Change (IPCC, 2007), with majority agreement, has pointed out that climate change is caused by human activities. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) also pointed out that these serious impacts by climate change will directly affect the poorer and more vulnerable communities and nations. According to the Human Development Report 20072008 by United Nation Development Program (UNDP, 2008), people in rural areas are most vulnerable to climate change, because it directly affects the resources in the ecosystem on which their lives depend. Countries with newly developed economy will be seriously hit, economically and socially, within the next few decades by natural disasters such as flood, draught, and storm, which have been increasing in number and severity. Human health is also adversely affected, which has multiplying effects in different sectors. Keywords: Citedy By: 30 Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Water Resources in the Kunhar River Basin, Pakistan Author: Rashid Mahmood, Shaofeng Jia,and Mukand S. Babel Journal: Water, 2016,Vol.8(1),2016--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is one of the most highly water-stressed countries in the world and its water resources are greatly vulnerable to changing climatic conditions. The present study investigates the possible impacts of climate change on the water resources of the Kunhar River basin, Pakistan, under A2 and B2 scenarios of HadCM3, a global climate model. After successful development of the hydrological modeling system (HEC-HMS) for the basin, streamflow was simulated for three future periods (20112040, 20412070, and 20712099) and compared with the baseline period (19611990) to explore the changes in different flow indicators such as mean flow, low flow, median flow, high flow, flow duration curves, temporal shift in peaks, and temporal shifts in center-of-volume dates. From the results obtained, an overall increase in mean annual flow was projected in the basin under both A2 and B2 scenarios. However, while summer and autumn showed a noticeable increase in streamflow, spring and winter showed decreased streamflow. High and median flows were predicted to increase, but low flow was projected to decrease in the future under both scenarios. Flow duration curves showed that the probability of occurrence of flow is likely to be more in the future. It was also noted that peaks were predicted to shift from June to July in the future, and the center-of-volume datethe date at which half of the annual flow passeswill be delayed by about 917 days in the basin, under both A2 and B2 scenarios. On the whole, the Kunhar basin will face more floods and droughts in the future due to the projected increase in high flow and decrease in low flow and greater temporal and magnitudinal variations in peak flows. These results highlight how important it is to take cognizance of the impact of climate change on water resources in the basin and to formulate suitable policies for the proper utilization and management of these resources Keywords: Climate change;downscaling;temperature;precipitation;hydrologic , modelling;water resources; Citedy By: 10 Vulnerability of the Indus Delta to Climate Change in Pakistan Author: Rasul, G.1,2, A. Mahmood2 , A. Sadiq3 , S. I. Khan4 Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology,Vol.8(16),2012--Pages Abstract: Climate has been experiencing a rapidly changing trend embedded with the increased frequency and intensity of extreme events in Pakistan due to global warming. The Indus Delta is a vast tract of fertile land feeding a large proportion of population with food and fiber. Although it is composed of low lying areas of the Indus irrigated plain but the changes occurring in the climatic conditions of the extreme north also directly affect through water deficit or surplus. The Himalaya-Karakoram-Hindukush region, which hosts worlds third largest ice mass after the poles, has warmed up more than 1.5 C almost double than remaining parts of Pakistan (0.76 C) during last three decades. Increased frequency of torrential rains, prolonged heat waves, frequent tropical cyclones, recurring flooding and persistent drought are the phenomenal changes experienced this deltaic region. Rapid melting of glaciers in the north is not only contributing to floods downstream rather it results into sea level rise. Resultantly, intrusion of saline sea water into the fertile land has been destroying the fertile agricultural land. Wind is a great natural resource possessing huge socio-economic benefits if augmented but increased intensity of storm surges and invasion of tropical cyclones are the great threats to infrastructure. Erratic behavior of monsoon precipitation has resulted in degradation of rangeland and further deterioration of the already degraded cultivated land areas such as those suffering from water erosion, wind erosion, water-logging, salinity etc. Future climate projections indicate that at least 5 C rise in temperature over the Indus Delta is expected by the end of 21st century. Due to this increase in temperature, domestic, animal and crop water requirements will rise 1.5 times over the present levels. Over the time population increased but water reservoirs were not developed at the same pace therefore Pakistan entered in the list of water deficit countries. Water availability will further decrease reducing the per capita share. Precipitation pattern is going to be highly variable. Poverty, lack of resources and low adaptive capacity of the local population of the Indus Delta to climate change has been exaggerating the vulnerabilities and posing challenges to sustainable food production Keywords: Citedy By: 351 Designing urban parks that ameliorate the effects of climate change Author: RD Brown,J Vanos,N Kenny,S Lenzholzer Journal: Landscape and Urban Planning ,Vol.138(),2015--Pages Abstract: Many inhabitants of cities throughout the world suffer from health problems and discomfort that are caused by overheating of urban areas, and there is compelling evidence that these problems will be exacerbated by global climate change. Most cities are not designed to ameliorate these effects although it is well-known that this is possible, especially through evidence-based climate-responsive design of urban open spaces. Urban parks and green spaces have the potential to provide thermally comfortable environments and help reduce vulnerability to heat stress. However, in order for them to provide this function, parks must be designed within the context of the prevailing climate and predicted future climates. To analyze the effects of elements that alter microclimate in parks, we used human energy budget simulations. We modelled the outdoor human energy budget in a range of warm to hot climate zones and interpreted the results in terms of thermal comfort and health vulnerability. Reduction of solar radiant input with trees had the greatest effect in all test cities. Reduction in air temperature was the second-most important component, and in some climates was nearly as important as incorporating shade. We then conducted similar modelling using predicted climates for the middle of the century, emphasizing the importance of city-level efforts for park design to assist in minimizing future climate-related urban health risks. These simulations suggested that heat waves in many climates will produce outdoor environments where people will be in extreme danger of heat stress, but that appropriately designed parks can reduce the threat. Keywords: Landscape architecture Urban design Microclimate Energy budget Hot climate Citedy By: 42 Ground water and climate change Author: RG Taylor,B Scanlon,P Dll,M Rodell Journal: NaturalClimate Change,Vol.(3-4),2013--Pages Abstract: As the worlds largest distributed store of fresh water, ground water plays a central part in sustaining ecosystems and enabling human adaptation to climate variability and change. The strategic importance of ground water for global water and food security will probably intensify under climate change as more frequent and intense climate extremes (droughts and floods) increase variability in precipitation, soil moisture and surface water. Here we critically review recent research assessing the impacts of climate on ground water through natural and human-induced processes as well as through groundwater-driven feedbacks on the climate system. Furthermore, we examine the possible opportunities and challenges of using and sustaining groundwater resources in climate adaptation strategies, and highlight the lack of groundwater observations, which, at present, limits our understanding of the dynamic relationship between ground water and climate Keywords: Citedy By: 369 HOW MUCH DAMAGE WILL CLIMATE CHANGE DO? RECENT ESTIMATES Author: Richard S.J. Tola,*, Samuel Fankhauserb , Richard G. Richelsc and Joel B. Smithd Journal: HENLEY ON THAMES,Vol.(),2000--Pages Abstract: Two reasons to be concerned about climate change are its unjust distributional impact and its negative aggregate effect on economic growth and welfare. Although our knowledge of the impact of climate change is incomplete and uncertain, economic valuation is difficult and controversial, and the effect of other developments on the impacts of climate change is largely speculative, we find that poorer countries and people are more vulnerable than are richer countries and people. A modest global warming is likely to have a net negative effect on poor countries in hot climates, but may have a net positive effect on rich countries in temperate climates. If one counts dollars, the world aggregate may be positive. If one counts people, the world aggregate is probably negative. Negative impacts would become more negative, and positive impacts would turn negative for more substantial warming. The marginal costs of carbon dioxide emissions are uncertain and sensitive to assumptions that partially reflect ethical positions, but unlikely to be larger that $50/tC. Keywords: climate change, impacts, valuation, marginal cost Citedy By: 125 Evolutionary genetics of mangroves: continental drift to recent climate change Author: RichardS.Dodd,ZaraAfzal Rafii, Journal: Trees, 2002,Vol.16(2-3),2002--Pages Abstract: Recent advances in our knowledge of the genetic architecture of mangrove species are reviewed and the consequences of this genetic architecture for species response to environmental change are inferred. The origins of mangrove taxa have been discussed many times, particularly in the context of centers of origin and continental drift. While global patterns of mangrove species diversity have been interpreted in the context of tectonic events and opening and closing of seawater passages, species evolution on a finer scale depends on more recent processes of population extinction and advances in response to spatio-temporal climatic and environmental flux. Understanding the likely effects of global climate change on mangrove distributions requires a focus on these more recent intraspecific evolutionary processes. Many mangrove taxa have wide geographic ranges that have been attributed to efficient propagule dispersal. Such gene flow should provide a genetic cohesiveness among populations. However, as with many wide-ranging marine organisms, we are finding important population genetic structure in widespread mangrove species, suggesting that gene flow is less effective than previously thought. Are these widespread taxa more recent and undergoing speciation? Spatial patterns in genetically adaptive traits indicate that some populations may survive more successfully under changing environmental conditions. However, is the present-day genetic architecture best poised to respond to predictions of climate change? These questions are addressed in the light of our increasing knowledge of genetic diversity in mangrove species. Keywords: Citedy By: 43 Adapting to flood risk under climate change Author: RL Wilby,R Keenan Journal: Progress in Physical Geography,Vol.36(3),2012--Pages Abstract: Flooding is the most common natural hazard and third most damaging globally after storms and earthquakes. Anthropogenic climate change is expected to increase flood risk through more frequent heavy precipitation, increased catchment wetness and sea level rise. This paper reviews steps being taken by actors at international, national, regional and community levels to adapt to flood risk from tidal, fluvial, surface and groundwater sources. We refer to existing inventories, national and sectoral adaptation plans, flood inquiries, building and planning codes, city plans, research literature and international policy reviews. We distinguish between theenablingenvironment for adaptation and specificimplementingmeasures to manage flood risk. Enabling includes routine monitoring, flood forecasting, data exchange, institutional reform, bridging organizations, contingency planning for disasters, insurance and legal incentives to reduce vulnerability. All such activities are low regret in that they yield benefits regardless of the climate scenario but are not cost-free. Implementing includes climate safety factors for new build, upgrading resistance and resilience of existing infrastructure, modifying operating rules, development control, flood forecasting, temporary and permanent retreat from hazardous areas, periodic review and adaptive management. We identify evidence of both types of adaptation following the catastrophic 2010/11 flooding in Victoria, Australia. However, significant challenges remain for managing transboundary flood risk (at all scales), protecting existing property at risk from flooding, and ensuring equitable outcomes in terms of risk reduction for all. Adaptive management also raises questions about the wider preparedness of society to systematically monitor and respond to evolving flood risks and vulnerabilities. Keywords: Citedy By: 149 Dire forecast: A theoretical model of the impact of climate change on crime Author: Robert Agnew Journal: Theoretical Criminology,Vol.16(1),2012--Pages Abstract: After providing an overview of climate change and its effects, this article draws on the leading crime theories to discuss the potential impact of climate change on crime. It is argued that climate change will increase strain, reduce social control, weaken social support, foster beliefs favorable to crime, contribute to traits conducive to crime, increase certain opportunities for crime, and create social conflict. An overall model of climate change and crime is then presented, along with suggestions for research. Even though neglected by criminologists, there is good reason to believe that climate change will become one of the major forces driving crime as the century progresses. Keywords: Citedy By: 82 Global climate change and the emergence/re-emergence of infectious diseases Author: Roland Zell Journal: International Journal of Medical Microbiology Supplements,Vol.293(37),2004--Pages Abstract: Variation in the incidence of vector-borne diseases is associated with extreme weather events and annual changes in weather conditions. Moreover, it is assumed that global warming might lead to an increase of infectious disease outbreaks. While a number of reports link disease outbreaks to single weather events, the El Nio/Southern Oscillation and other largescale climate fluctuations, no report unequivocally associates vector-borne discases with increased temperature and the environmental changes expected to accompany it. The complexity of not yet fully understood pathogen transmission dynamics with numerous variables might be an explanation of the problems in assessing the risk factors. Keywords: Climate, global warmingchange, infectious disease, emergent disease, human health, pathogen transmission Citedy By: 119 Climate Change-related Health Impacts in the Hindu KushHimalayas Author: RosalieWoodruff,AlexandervonHildebrand,CarlosCorvalan,KristieL.Ebi, Journal: EcoHealth,Vol.4(3),2007--Pages Abstract: Our goal was to identify the climate change-related health risks and vulnerable populations specific to the mountainous regions of the Hindu KushHimalayas. We reviewed published information of the likely health consequences of climate change in mountain regions, especially the findings of a workshop for countries in the Hindu KushHimalaya region, organized by the World Health Organization, World Meteorological Organization, United Nations Environment Programme, and United Nations Development Programme. The main climate-related risks in the Hindu KushHimalaya region include the expansion of vector-borne diseases as pathogens take advantage of new habitats in altitudes that were formerly unsuitable. Diarrheal diseases could become more prevalent with changes in freshwater quality and availability. More extreme rainfall events are likely to increase the number of floods and landslides with consequent death and injuries. A unique risk is sudden floods from high glacier lakes, which cause substantial destruction and loss of life. Because glaciers are the main source of freshwater for upland regions and downstream countries, the long-term reduction in annual glacier snowmelt is expected to heighten existing water insecurity in these areas. Climate change also is bringing some benefits to mountain populations, including milder winters and longer growing seasons. Populations in mountain regions have unique combinations of vulnerabilities to climate change. The extent of the health impacts experienced will depend on the effectiveness of public health efforts to identify and implement low-cost preparedness and response measures, and on the speed at which emissions of greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced. Keywords: climate changeHindu KushHimalayashuman healthmountains Citedy By: 59 How will climate change affect mycotoxins in food? Author: RRM Paterson, N Lima Journal: Food Research International,Vol.43(7),2010--Pages Abstract: This invited review and opinion piece, assesses the impact of climate change on mycotoxins in food: only one paper and an abstract referred directly from a substantial literature search and then only in relation to Europe. Climate change is an accepted probability by most scientists. Favourable temperature and water activity are crucial for mycotoxigenic fungi and mycotoxin production. Fungal diseases of crops provide relevant information for pre-harvest mycotoxin contamination. However, the mycotoxin issue also involves post-harvest scenarios. There are no data on how mycotoxins affect competing organisms in crop ecosystems. In general, if the temperature increases in cool or temperate climates, the relevant countries may become more liable to aflatoxins. Tropical countries may become too inhospitable for conventional fungal growth and mycotoxin production. Could this lead to the extinction of thermotolerantAspergillus flavus? Currently cold regions may become liable to temperate problems concerning ochratoxin A, patulin andFusariumtoxins (e.g. deoxynivalenol). Regions which can afford to control the environment of storage facilities may be able to avoid post-harvest problems but at high additional cost. There appears to be a lack of awareness of the issue in some non-European countries. The era will provide numerous challenges for mycotoxicologists. Keywords: Mycotoxins Climate change Fungi Aflatoxins Deoxynivalenol Ochratoxin A Temperature Water activity Citedy By: 283 Further mycotoxin effects from climate change Author: RRM Paterson, N Lima Journal: Food Research International ,Vol.44(9),2011--Pages Abstract: Climate change will affect mycotoxins in food. The 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report is reinterpreted herein to account for what may occur with mycotoxins. Warmer weather, heat waves, greater precipitation and drought will have various impacts, depending on which regions of the world and mycotoxin systems are considered. The humidity issues are more complex as some areas will experience drought and others greater precipitation:in vivodata on the effects of moisture on mycotoxins in crops are more ambiguous than those for temperature.In vitrodata on fungal growth and mycotoxin production may not relate directly to the situation in the field or post harvest, but are useful for base-line assumptions. The effects of climate in various regions of the world, i.e. Africa, Europe, Asia, Latin America and North America are considered in terms of mycotoxin contamination. Crops introduced to exploit altered climate may be subject to fewer mycotoxin producing fungi (the Parasites Lost phenomenon). Increased mycotoxins and UV radiation may cause fungi to mutate on crops and produce different mycotoxins. Whereas there is relevant information on aflatoxins, deoxynivalenol, and ochratoxin A, more mycotoxins require to be considered: Data on patulin are missing. The current paper considers uniquely ergot alkaloids. Amelioration strategies are provided. There is considerable urgency in the need to address these issues. Keywords: Aspergillus flavus Fusarium graminearum Climate change Aflatoxins Ochratoxin A Deoxynivalenol Africa North America Citedy By: 95 Estimating global impacts from climate change Author: S Hitz, J Smith - Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.14(3),2004--Pages Abstract: We surveyed the literature to assess the state of knowledge with regard to the (presumed) benefits or avoided damages of reducing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases to progressively lower levels. The survey included only published studies addressing global impacts of climate change; studies that only addressed regional impacts were not included. The metric we used for change in climate is increase in global mean temperature (GMT). The focus of the analysis centred on determining the general shape of the damage curve, expressed as a function of GMT. Studies in sea level rise, agriculture, water resources, human health, energy, terrestrial ecosystems productivity, forestry, biodiversity, and marine ecosystems productivity were examined. In addition, we analysed several studies that aggregate results across sectors. Results are presented using metrics as reported in the surveyed studies and thus are not aggregated. We found that the relationships between GMT and impacts are not consistent across sectors. Some of the sectors exhibit increasing adverse impacts with increasing GMT, in particular coastal resources, biodiversity, and possibly marine ecosystem productivity. Some sectors are characterised by a parabolic relationship between temperature and impacts (benefits at lower GMT increases, damages at higher GMT increases), in particular, agriculture, terrestrial ecosystem productivity, and possibly forestry. The relationship between global impacts and increase in GMT for water, health, energy, and aggregate impacts appears to be uncertain. One consistent pattern is that beyond an approximate 34C increase in GMT, all of the studies we examined, with the possible exception of forestry, show increasing adverse impacts. Thus, in total, it appears likely that there are increasing adverse impacts at higher increases in GMT. We were unable to determine the relationship between total impacts and climate change up to a 34C increase in GMT. There are important uncertainties in the studies we surveyed that prevent us from a precise identification of 34C as the critical temperature transition range, beyond which damages are adverse and increasing. We are confident in general however, that beyond several degrees of GMT, damages tend to be adverse and increasing. We conclude by suggesting some priorities for future research that, if undertaken, would further our understanding of how impacts are apt to vary with increases in GMT. Keywords: Global impacts of climate change Agriculture Forestry Water Ecosystems, Biodiversity Human health impacts of climate change Citedy By: 258 Framing climate change adaptation learning and action: the case of Lahore, Pakistan Author: S Janjua, I Thomas,D McEvoy Journal: International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management ,Vol.2(),2009--Pages Abstract: Purpose The purpose of this paper is to identify and critically examine a framing of key characteristics for climate change adaptation learning and action in the context of urban Pakistani local government. Design/methodology/approach The research employed a combination of approaches; predominantly literature review and interview methodologies. Recognising the need to understand climate change adaptation as an iterative learning process, the literature review concentrated on organisational and policy learning, with special consideration given to those characteristics most pertinent to urban governance in the Pakistani context. This analysis was then furthered through primary data collated through a series of interviews, with the City District Government of Lahore as the chosen case study for this piece of research. Initial scoping interviews were followed up by a series of in-depth, semi-structured, interviews with local government officials, an assessment process used to examine conceptual evidence and findings in the Pakistani urban context. A total of 21 Pakistani professionals, working in a variety of roles for local government, were subject to the interview process. Findings From a critical analysis of conceptual and real world evidence, the authors identified six discrete characteristics that could be used to frame the context of climate change adaptation learning and action in the Pakistani urban local government context. These have been categorised as: leadership for adaptation, vision for adaptation, culture for adaptation, good governance for adaptation, innovation and creativity for adaptation and resources for adaptation. Originality/value The value of this paper is several-fold: it applies a learning perspective to the climate change adaptation debate, identifies a framing of key characteristics for climate change adaptation learning and action, and uses an actor-based approach to examine some of the key conceptual ideas in the Pakistani urban context. Keywords: Pakistan,Urban regions,Local government,Global warming,Learning Citedy By: 7 Downscaling of precipitation for climate change scenarios: A support vector machine approach Author: S Tripathi,VV Srinivas,RS Nanjundiah Journal: Journal of Hydrology,Vol.330(3-4),2006--Pages Abstract: The Climate impact studies in hydrology often rely on climate change information at fine spatial resolution. However, general circulation models (GCMs), which are among the most advanced tools for estimating future climate change scenarios, operate on a coarse scale. Therefore the output from a GCM has to be downscaled to obtain the information relevant to hydrologic studies. In this paper, a support vector machine (SVM) approach is proposed for statistical downscaling of precipitation at monthly time scale. The effectiveness of this approach is illustrated through its application to meteorological sub-divisions (MSDs) in India. First, climate variables affecting spatio-temporal variation of precipitation at each MSD in India are identified. Following this, the data pertaining to the identified climate variables (predictors) at each MSD are classified using cluster analysis to form two groups, representing wet and dry seasons. For each MSD, SVM- based downscaling model (DM) is developed for season(s) with significant rainfall using principal components extracted from the predictors as input and the contemporaneous precipitation observed at the MSD as an output. The proposed DM is shown to be superior to conventional downscaling using multi-layer back-propagation artificial neural networks. Subsequently, the SVM-based DM is applied to future climate predictions from the second generation Coupled Global Climate Model (CGCM2) to obtain future projections of precipitation for the MSDs. The results are then analyzed to assess the impact of climate change on precipitation over India. It is shown that SVMs provide a promising alternative to conventional artificial neural networks for statistical downscaling, and are suitable for conducting climate impact studies. Keywords: Precipitation, Downscaling, Climate change General circulation model (GCM),Support vector machine, Neural network, Hydroclimatology, India Citedy By: 322 Mutagenesis in crop improvement under the climate change Author: S. MOHAN JAIN Journal: Romanian Biotechnological Letters,Vol.15(2),2010--Pages Abstract: The purpose of mutation induction is to enhance mutation rate in a short duration in developing new plant varieties. The occurrence of spontaneous mutation frequency rate is very low and difficult to use in plant breeding. Traditionally mutations are induced by physical (e.g. gamma radiation) and chemical (e.g. ethylmethane sulfonate) mutagen treatment of both seed and vegetatively propagated crops. Recently high energy ion beams have been used for mutation induction. They induce largely deletion mutants. In International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) mutant database, over 3000 officially released mutant varieties have been released worldwide in cereals, ornamental plants, fruits, vegetables, and oil crops. As a result, sustainable food production has been maintained. By in vitro selection, desirable mutants with useful agronomical traits, e.g. abiotic and biotic stress tolerant can be isolated in a short period of time. The genetic fidelity of the regenerated plants is highly desirable for developing new improved plant varieties and a useful as a reliable tool for feeding the ever-growing human population, genomic function especially under climate change and limited arable land. Keywords: Physical mutagen, chemical mutagen, mutation, deletion mutants, in vitro selection, genomic Citedy By: 79 Herders Perceptions of and Responses to Climate Change in Northern Pakistan Author: S.Joshi W.A.Jasra, M.Ismail, R.M.Shrestha, S.L.Y,N.Wu Journal: Environmental Management,Vol.52(3),2013--Pages Abstract: Migratory pastoralism is an adaptation to a harsh and unstable environment, and pastoral herders have traditionally adapted to environmental and climatic change by building on their in-depth knowledge of this environment. In the Hindu Kush Himalayan region, and particularly in the arid and semiarid areas of northern Pakistan, pastoralism, the main livelihood, is vulnerable to climate change. Little detailed information is available about climate trends and impacts in remote mountain regions; herders perceptions of climate change can provide the information needed by policy makers to address problems and make decisions on adaptive strategies in high pastoral areas. A survey was conducted in GilgitBaltistan province of Pakistan to assess herders perceptions of, and adaptation strategies to climate change. Herders perceptions were gathered in individual interviews and focus group discussions. The herders perceived a change in climate over the past 1015years with longer and more intense droughts in summer, more frequent and heavier snowfall in winter, and prolonged summers and relatively shorter winters. These perceptions were validated by published scientific evidence. The herders considered that the change in climate had directly impacted pastures and then livestock by changing vegetation composition and reducing forage yield. They had adopted some adaptive strategies in response to the change such as altering the migration pattern and diversifying livelihoods. The findings show that the herder communities have practical lessons and indigenous knowledge related to rangeland management and adaptation to climate change that should be shared with the scientific community and integrated into development planning. Keywords: AdaptationClimate changeHerdersHindu Kush Himalayan regionPerceptionRangeland Citedy By: 19 Deforestation, Climate Change and Sustainable Nutrition Security: A Case Study of India Author: S.K.Sinha, M.S.Swaminathan Journal: Tropical Forests and Climate,Vol.(),1991--Pages Abstract: Wheat and rice are the most important crops from the point of view of maintaining a sustainable nutrition security system for India, a country whose population may reach one billion by the year 2000. The implications of climate change deriving from tropical deforestation, particularly as concerns temperature and precipitation, with reference to the yield of wheat and rice in different parts of India are hence being studied carefully. Any possible positive gain arising from increased CO2, concentration is likely to be offset by the yield decline induced by higher temperature and shorter growing period Keywords: Citedy By: 117 Deforestation, Climate Change and Sustainable Nutrition Security: A Case Study of India Author: S.K.Sinha,M.S.Swaminathan, Journal: Tropical Forests and Climate,Vol.(),1991--Pages Abstract: Wheat and rice are the most important crops from the point of view of maintaining a sustainable nutrition security system for India, a country whose population may reach one billion by the year 2000. The implications of climate change deriving from tropical deforestation, particularly as concerns temperature and precipitation, with reference to the yield of wheat and rice in different parts of India are hence being studied carefully. Any possible positive gain arising from increased CO2, concentration is likely to be offset by the yield decline induced by higher temperature and shorter growing period Keywords: Citedy By: 117 Rainfall Trends in Different Climate Zones of Pakistan Author: Salma S, M A Shah, S Rehman Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology ,Vol.9(17),2012--Pages Abstract: In this paper, the study was conducted across the country to assess the rainfall trend in different climate zones of Pakistan over the past three decades. For this purpose dataset comprising 30 years for the period 1976 to 2005 were acquired from 30 meteorological observatories from different parts of the country. The whole data was analyzed through Analysis Of Variations (ANOVA) along Dunnett T3 test. The result has shown a decreasing trend (-1.18mm/decade) all over the country, which may be attributed to the presence of drought period during 1998-2001. Stations located in different zones of the country mainly from North, North West, West and Coastal areas respectively show overall significant decreasing trend whereas plain areas and South West of the coun try have been observed with no significant trend. Adverse consequences of the rainfall have already been observed in Pakistan in the form of droughts and super floods which have badly affected human settlements, water management and agriculture sector Keywords: Citedy By: 34 The opening of Pandoras Box: climate change impacts on soil fertility and crop nutrition in developing countries Author: SBS Clair, JP Lynch Journal: Plant and Soil,Vol.335(1-2),2010--Pages Abstract: Feeding the worlds growing population is a serious challenge. Food insecurity is concentrated in developing nations, where drought and low soil fertility are primary constraints to food production. Many crops in developing countries are supported by weathered soils in which nutrient deficiencies and ion toxicities are common. Many systems have declining soil fertility due to inadequate use of fertility inputs, ongoing soil degradation, and increasingly intense resource use by burgeoning populations. Climate models predict that warmer temperatures and increases in the frequency and duration of drought during the 21st century will have net negative effects on agricultural productivity. The potential effects of climate change on soil fertility and the ability of crops to acquire and utilize soil nutrients is poorly understood, but is essential for understanding the future of global agriculture. This paper explores how rising temperature, drought and more intense precipitation events projected in climate change scenarios for the 21st century might affect soil fertility and the mineral nutrition of crops in developing countries. The effects of climate change on erosion rates, soil organic carbon losses, soil moisture, root growth and function, root-microbe associations and plant phenology as they relate to mineral nutrition are discussed. Our analysis suggests that the negative impacts of climate change on soil fertility and mineral nutrition of crops will far exceed beneficial effects, which would intensify food insecurity, particularly in developing countries. Keywords: DroughtErosionFood securityPrecipitationSoil degradationSoil organic carbonTemperature Citedy By: 110 Dengue transmission in the Asia-Pacific region: impact of climate change and socio-environmental factors Author: Shahera Banu,Wenbiao Hu,Cameron Hurst,Shilu Tong, Journal: Tropical Medicine & International Health,Vol.16(5),2011--Pages Abstract: To review the scientific evidence about the impact of climate change and socio-environmental factors on dengue transmission, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region. MethodsSearch of the published literature on PubMed, ISI web of Knowledge and Google Scholar. Articles were included if an association between climate or socio-environmental factors and dengue transmission was assessed in any country of the Asia-Pacific region. ResultsTwenty-two studies met the inclusion criteria. The weight of the evidence indicates that global climate change is likely to affect the seasonal and geographical distribution of dengue fever (DF) in the Asia-Pacific region. However, empirical evidence linking DF to climate change is inconsistent across geographical locations and absent in some countries where dengue is endemic. ConclusionEven though climate change may play an increasing role in the transmission of DF, no clear evidence shows that such impact has already occurred. More research is needed across countries to better understand the relationship between climate change and dengue transmission. Future research should also consider and adjust for the influence of important socio-environmental factors in the assessment of the climate change-related effects on dengue transmission. Keywords: Citedy By: 84 A PRELIMINARY STUDY ON CLIMATE CHANGE CAUSING DECLINE IN FOREST COVER AREA IN DISTRICT CHAKWAL, PAKISTAN Author: SHEIKH SAEED AHMAD, ANUSHA SHERAZI AND MUHAMMAD TAHIR ALI SHAH Journal: Pak. J. Bot,Vol.42(6),2010--Pages Abstract: The analysis of species density and species distribution based on the analysis of land cover characteristics is an important aspect in the process of understanding forest ecology. Therefore in the present study a GIS based approach was followed to produce different scale vegetation maps for a study area in district Chakwal. The prime forest areas in district Chakwal were identified for the study by integrating the areas of land cover change derived for the change in climate in the years 2005-6 and 2009-10 by the use of GIS mapping. Results show that the minimum temperature of the district increased from 9.4o C to 9.9o C during the period of 2005-06 to 2009-10, and the maximum temperature increased from 33.8o C to 35o C. The humidity changed from 69.1% to 70.3% followed by the rainfall decrease from 872mm to 557mm. These distinguished changes in the climate caused the decline in the forest area of the region. The total forest area was found to be around 698Km2 in the year 2005-06, which declined to about 625 Km2 in 2009-10. The study further demonstrates the utility of GIS technique for the assessment of land cover change areas particularly in the regions where significant climate change conditions are occurring and forests are being lost. Keywords: Citedy By: 14 DECLINE OF CONIFER FOREST COVER IN PAKISTAN: A GIS APPROACH Author: SHEIKH SAEED AHMAD, QURAT-UL-AIN ABBASI, RUKHSANA JABEEN AND MUHAMMAD TAHIR SHAH Journal: Pak. J. Bot.,Vol.44(2),2012--Pages Abstract: Deforestation is one of the obstinate environmental problems globally. Pakistan, being a developing nation also encompasses crisis of depletion of forest reserves. The rising climate change consequences remain the primary culprit behind this phenomenon. The present study intends to focus attention on one of the threatened vegetation types, the Conifer forests and their consequent reduction in area during the last two decades. GIS techniques have been employed to analyze the change detection in various regions and provinces of Pakistan. The results of current study indicated that Conifer forests have been declining at the rate of 1.27% per annum since 1992, showing negative trends due to various causes associated with climate change i.e. increase in temperature and decrease in rainfall. So, the need for the conservation of these forests should be the basic task to accomplish order to avoid their vulnerability against various environmental and socio economic disturbances. Keywords: Citedy By: 16 Isotopic reconstructions of habitat change surrounding the extinction ofSivapithecus, a Miocene hominoid, in the Siwalik Group of Pakistan Author: Sherry V.Nelson Journal: Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology ,Vol.243(1-2),2007--Pages Abstract: This research presents an isotopic study of a wide range of mammalian taxa from the Miocene Siwalik Group of Pakistan, with a focus on two time intervals9.39.2Ma, when the hominoidSivapithecuswas present, and 8.18.0Ma, shortly afterSivapithecusbecame extinct. The purpose of this investigation is to reconstruct the vegetation mosaic at both time levels in order to determine whatSivapithecushabitat was like and what changes in habitat and climate may have taken place by the timeSivapithecuswent extinct. Both carbon and oxygen stable isotopes were sampled from inorganic carbonate in tooth enamel. Results indicate a vegetation mosaic of both closed and open habitat at both time intervals, but a decrease in forest accompanied by an increase in open habitat (including C4grasses) during the younger interval. Individuals from many species cluster with each other with respect to both carbon and oxygen isotope values, indicating a spectrum of feeding adaptations exploiting different parts of the habitat. Isotopic values forSivapithecussuggest that it fed in the forest upper canopy. Taxa feeding in the most closed, wet habitat become extinct by 8.1Ma. Furthermore, higherd18O values over time suggest a change in climate with a reduction in annual rainfall, perhaps accompanied by changes in precipitation sources or rainfall regime as well. These results suggest that forests became fragmented over time. While still present in the younger level, much of the forest was replaced by open habitat, including patches of C4grass. Forest loss and fragmentation is a likely cause of the extinction ofSivapithecus. Keywords: Sivapithecus Miocene Paleoecology Stable isotopes Siwalik Group Citedy By: 57 Global Hydrological Cycles and World Water Resources Author: Shinjiro Kanae,Taikan Oki Journal: Science ,Vol.313(5790),2006--Pages Abstract: Water is a naturally circulating resource that is constantly recharged. Therefore, even though the stocks of water in natural and artificial reservoirs are helpful to increase the available water resources for human society, the flow of water should be the main focus in water resources assessments. The climate system puts an upper limit on the circulation rate of available renewable freshwater resources (RFWR). Although current global withdrawals are well below the upper limit, more than two billion people live in highly water-stressed areas because of the uneven distribution of RFWR in time and space. Climate change is expected to accelerate water cycles and thereby increase the available RFWR. This would slow down the increase of people living under water stress; however, changes in seasonal patterns and increasing probability of extreme events may offset this effect. Reducing current vulnerability will be the first step to prepare for such anticipated changes. Keywords: Citedy By: 1630 Widespread Climate Change in the Himalayas and Associated Changes in Local Ecosystems Author: Shiva Gautam, Kamaljit S. Bawa Uttam Babu Shrestha Journal: PLoS One,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: Climate change in the Himalayas, a biodiversity hotspot, home of many sacred landscapes, and the source of eight largest rivers of Asia, is likely to impact the well-being of ~20% of humanity. However, despite the extraordinary environmental, cultural, and socio-economic importance of the Himalayas, and despite their rapidly increasing ecological degradation, not much is known about actual changes in the two most critical climatic variables: temperature and rainfall. Nor do we know how changes in these parameters might impact the ecosystems including vegetation phenology Keywords: Citedy By: 154 Widespread Climate Change in the Himalayas and Associated Changes in Local Ecosystems Author: Shiva Gautam, Kamaljit S. Bawa,Uttam Babu Shrestha Journal: PLoS One,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: Climate change in the Himalayas, a biodiversity hotspot, home of many sacred landscapes, and the source of eight largest rivers of Asia, is likely to impact the well-being of ~20% of humanity. However, despite the extraordinary environmental, cultural, and socio-economic importance of the Himalayas, and despite their rapidly increasing ecological degradation, not much is known about actual changes in the two most critical climatic variables: temperature and rainfall. Nor do we know how changes in these parameters might impact the ecosystems including vegetation phenology Keywords: Citedy By: 154 Future change in the frequency of warm and cold spells over Pakistan simulated by the PRECIS regional climate model Author: SirajulIslamEmail author, NadiaRehman, MuhammadMunirSheikh Journal: ClimaticChange,Vol.94(1-2),2009--Pages Abstract: Climate change caused by anthropogenic activities has generated a variety of research focusing on investigating the past climate, predicting the future climate and quantifying the change in climate extreme events by using different climate models. Climate extreme events are valuable to evaluate the potential impact of climate change on human activities, agriculture and economy and are also useful to monitor the climate change on global scale. Here, a Regional Climate Model (RCM) simulation is used to study the future variations in the temperature extreme indices, particularly change in frequency of warm and cold spells duration over Pakistan. The analyses are done on the basis of simulating two 30 years simulations with the Hadley Centers RCM PRECIS, at a horizontal resolution of 50 km. Simulation for the period 19611990 represents the recent climate and simulation for the period 2071 2100 represents the future climate. These simulations are driven by lateral boundary conditions from HadAM3P GCM of Hadley centre UK. For the validation of model, observed mean, maximum and minimum temperatures for the period 19611990 at all the available stations in Pakistan are first averaged and are then compared with the PRECIS averaged grid-box data. Also the observed monthly gridded data set of Climate Research Unit (UK) data is used to validate the model. Temperature indices in the base period as well as in future are then calculated and the corresponding change is observed. Percentile based spatial change of temperature shows that in summer, increase in daily minimum temperature is more as compared to the increase of daily maximum temperature whereas in winter, the change in maximum temperature is high. The occurrence of annual cold spells shows significantly decreasing trend while for warm spells there is slight increasing trend over Pakistan. Keywords: Citedy By: 46 Mapping vulnerability to climate change and its repercussions on human health in Pakistan Author: SM Malik, H Awan, N Khan Journal: Globalization and Health,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is highly vulnerable to climate change due to its geographic location, high dependence on agriculture and water resources, low adaptive capacity of its people, and weak system of emergency preparedness. This paper is the first ever attempt to rank the agro-ecological zones in Pakistan according to their vulnerability to climate change and to identify the potential health repercussions of each manifestation of climate change in the context of Pakistan MethodsA climate change vulnerability index is constructed as an un-weighted average of three sub-indices measuring (a) the ecological exposure of each region to climate change, (b) sensitivity of the population to climate change and (c) the adaptive capacity of the population inhabiting a particular region. The regions are ranked according to the value of this index and its components. Since health is one of the most important dimensions of human wellbeing, this paper also identifies the potential health repercussions of each manifestations of climate change and links it with the key manifestations of climate change in the context of Pakistan.Results The results indicate that Balochistan is the most vulnerable region with high sensitivity and low adaptive capacity followed by low-intensity Punjab (mostly consisting of South Punjab) and Cotton/Wheat Sindh. The health risks that each of these regions face depend upon the type of threat that they face from climate change. Greater incidence of flooding, which may occur due to climate variability, poses the risk of diarrhoea and gastroenteritis; skin and eye Infections; acute respiratory infections; and malaria. Exposure to drought poses the potential health risks in the form of food insecurity and malnutrition; anaemia; night blindness; and scurvy. Increases in temperature pose health risks of heat stroke; malaria; dengue; respiratory diseases; and cardiovascular diseases.ConclusionThe study concludes that geographical zones that are more exposed to climate change in ecological and geographic terms- such as Balochistan, Low-Intensity Punjab, and Cotton-Wheat Sindh -also happen to be the most deprived regions in Pakistan in terms of socio-economic indicators, suggesting that the government needs to direct its efforts to the socio-economic uplift of these lagging regions to reduce their vulnerability to the adverse effects of climate change. Keywords: PakistanClimate changeVulnerabilityHealthPakistan Citedy By: 24 Biomass fuel burning and its implications: Deforestation and greenhouse gases emissions in Pakistan Author: SNA Tahir, M Rafique,AS Alaamer Journal: Environmental Pollution ,Vol.158(7),2010--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is facing problem of deforestation. Pakistan lost 14.7% of its forest habitat between 1990 and 2005 interval. This paper assesses the present forest wood consumption rate by 6000 brick kilns established in the country and its implications in terms of deforestation and emission of greenhouse gases. Information regarding consumption of forest wood by the brick kilns was collected during a manual survey of 180 brick kiln units conducted in eighteen provincial divisions of country. Considering annual emission contributions of three primary GHGs i.e., CO2, CH4and N2O, due to burning of forest wood in brick kiln units in Pakistan and using IPCC recommended GWP indices, the combined CO2-equivalent has been estimated to be 533019ty-1. Keywords: Deforestation Biomass burning Brick kilns Greenhouse gas emission Citedy By: 29 Climate change effects on beneficial plantmicroorganism interactions Author: Stphane Compant, Marcel G.A. Van Der Heijden, Angela Sessitsch Journal: FEMS Microbiology Ecology,Vol.73(2),2010--Pages Abstract: It is well known that beneficial plant-associated microorganisms may stimulate plant growth and enhance resistance to disease and abiotic stresses. The effects of climate change factors such as elevated CO2, drought and warming on beneficial plantmicroorganism interactions are increasingly being explored. This now makes it possible to test whether some general patterns occur and whether different groups of plant-associated microorganisms respond differently or in the same way to climate change. Here, we review the results of 135 studies investigating the effects of climate change factors on beneficial microorganisms and their interaction with host plants. The majority of studies showed that elevated CO2had a positive influence on the abundance of arbuscular and ectomycorrhizal fungi, whereas the effects on plant growth-promoting bacteria and endophytic fungi were more variable. In most cases, plant-associated microorganisms had a beneficial effect on plants under elevated CO2. The effects of increased temperature on beneficial plant-associated microorganisms were more variable, positive and neutral, and negative effects were equally common and varied considerably with the study system and the temperature range investigated. Moreover, numerous studies indicated that plant growth-promoting microorganisms (both bacteria and fungi) positively affected plants subjected to drought stress. Overall, this review shows that plant-associated microorganisms are an important factor influencing the response of plants to climate change. Keywords: Citedy By: 195 Climate change effects on beneficial plantmicroorganism interactions Author: Stphane Compant,Marcel G.A. Van Der Heijden, Angela Sessitsch, Journal: FEMS Microbiology Ecology,Vol.73(2),2010--Pages Abstract: It is well known that beneficial plant-associated microorganisms may stimulate plant growth and enhance resistance to disease and abiotic stresses. The effects of climate change factors such as elevated CO2, drought and warming on beneficial plantmicroorganism interactions are increasingly being explored. This now makes it possible to test whether some general patterns occur and whether different groups of plant-associated microorganisms respond differently or in the same way to climate change. Here, we review the results of 135 studies investigating the effects of climate change factors on beneficial microorganisms and their interaction with host plants. The majority of studies showed that elevated CO2had a positive influence on the abundance of arbuscular and ectomycorrhizal fungi, whereas the effects on plant growth-promoting bacteria and endophytic fungi were more variable. In most cases, plant-associated microorganisms had a beneficial effect on plants under elevated CO2. The effects of increased temperature on beneficial plant-associated microorganisms were more variable, positive and neutral, and negative effects were equally common and varied considerably with the study system and the temperature range investigated. Moreover, numerous studies indicated that plant growth-promoting microorganisms (both bacteria and fungi) positively affected plants subjected to drought stress. Overall, this review shows that plant-associated microorganisms are an important factor influencing the response of plants to climate change. Keywords: Citedy By: 195 Review of Climate Change Adaptation Practices in South Asia Author: Sterrett, Charlotte Journal: Oxfam Policy and Practice: Climate Change and Resilience,Vol.7(4),2011--Pages Abstract: Climate change is predicted to have severe consequences for South Asia, particularly in agriculture, which employs more than 60 per cent of the region's labour force. Adaptation efforts in South Asia have so far been fragmented, lacking a strong link between national climate change strategies and plans, and existing disaster risk reduction, agricultural, and other relevant policies. This disconnectpartly stems from a lack of conceptual understanding and partly from the ongoing debate as to what constitutes adaptation and what represents good and sustainable development. Focusing on five countries in the region (Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka), this review captures examples of good practice in climate change adaptation programming, in order to inform Oxfam's learning, enabling it and other organisations to replicate some of these good practices in their own programmes and to advocate their adequate financing and governance. Keywords: Citedy By: 30 Response of the Ganges dispersal system to climate change: a source-to-sink view since the last interstade Author: Steven L.GoodbredJr. Journal: Sedimentary Geology,Vol.162(1-2),2003--Pages Abstract: The forcing of sediment dispersal systems by climate is widely accepted, but there remains disagreement on the general responses to climate change such as, how resulting signals propagate downstream and, ultimately, how they are preserved in the stratigraphic record. Towards a better understanding of these issues, this paper presents a comprehensive overview of Ganges dispersal system behavior since the last interstade, which reveals major, coeval responses to changes in the South Asian monsoon. At >3000 km from its mountain headwaters to deep-sea fan, the Ganges dispersal system is immense and yet shows tight coupling between source area, catchment basin and coastal and marine depocenters. Furthermore, system-wide responses and downstream transfer of the signal appear to occur at least as fast as current temporal resolution of 12 ky. This tight linkage of source-to-sink components is considered a function of the southwest (summer) monsoon's overwhelming control on regional hydrology. About 80% of the Ganges discharge and 95% of its sediment load are delivered to the margin during only 4 months, making the system extremely sensitive to this seasonal forcing. In addition, the regional scale and distribution of the monsoon weather system means that changes in atmospheric circulation affect the entire drainage basin rather than local subcomponents. Finally, despite its present intensity, strength of the summer monsoon has varied significantly over the past 150 ky under orbitally driven changes in insolation and global (glacial) boundary conditions. The resulting changes in precipitation, both well above and below modern values, have forced system-wide responses ranging from glacier advance/retreat to sediment fluxes to the margin and deep-sea fan. The overall conclusions are (1) that this immense dispersal system responds to multimillennial-scale (<104years) climate change in a system-wide and largely contemporaneous manner and (2) that major sedimentary signals can be transferred rapidly from source to sink with little apparent attenuation. Furthermore, these acute responses to climate change have produced sedimentary/stratigraphic features that diverge from traditional sequence models in their nature and timing. Keywords: River delta Sediment transport South Asian monsoon, Paleohydrology Citedy By: 219 Climate change and malaria in India Author: Sumana Bhattacharya, C. Sharma , R. C. Dhiman and A. P. Mitra Journal: CLIMATE CHANGE AND INDIA,Vol.90(3),2006--Pages Abstract: The focus in this paper is to understand the likely influence of climate change on vector production and malaria transmission in India. A set of transmission windows typical to India have been developed, in terms of different temperature ranges for a particular range of relative humidity, by analysing the present climate trends and corresponding malaria incidences. Using these transmission window criteria, the most endemic malarious regions emerge as the central and eastern Indian regions of the country covering Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhatisgarh, Orissa, West Bengal and Assam in the current climate conditions. Applying the same criteria under the future climate change conditions (results of HadRM2 using 1S92a scenario) in 2050s, it is projected that malaria is likely to persist in Orissa, West Bengal and southern parts of Assam, bordering north of West Bengal. However, it may shift from the central Indian region to the south western coastal states of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala. Also the northern states, including Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram in the northeast may become malaria prone. The duration of the transmission windows is likely to widen in northern and western states and shorten in the southern states. The extent of vulnerability due to malaria depends on the prevailing socio-economic conditions. The increase or decrease in vulnerability due to climate change in the 2050s will therefore depend on the developmental path followed by India. Therefore it is important to understand the current adaptation mechanisms and improve the coping capacities of the vulnerable section of the population by helping to enhance their accessibility to health services, improved surveillance and forecasting technologies. Keywords: Climate determinants, malaria incidence, P. falciparum, P. vivax, transmission window, vector. Citedy By: 180 Climate change and malaria in India Author: Sumana Bhattacharya, C. Sharma , R. C. Dhiman and A. P. Mitra Journal: SPECIAL SECTION: CLIMATE CHANGE AND INDIA,Vol.90(3),2006--Pages Abstract: The focus in this paper is to understand the likely influence of climate change on vector production and malaria transmission in India. A set of transmission windows typical to India have been developed, in terms of different temperature ranges for a particular range of relative humidity, by analysing the present climate trends and corresponding malaria incidences. Using these transmission window criteria, the most endemic malarious regions emerge as the central and eastern Indian regions of the country covering Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhatisgarh, Orissa, West Bengal and Assam in the current climate conditions. Applying the same criteria under the future climate change conditions (results of HadRM2 using 1S92a scenario) in 2050s, it is projected that malaria is likely to persist in Orissa, West Bengal and southern parts of Assam, bordering north of West Bengal. However, it may shift from the central Indian region to the south western coastal states of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala. Also the northern states, including Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram in the northeast may become malaria prone. The duration of the transmission windows is likely to widen in northern and western states and shorten in the southern states. The extent of vulnerability due to malaria depends on the prevailing socio-economic conditions. The increase or decrease in vulnerability due to climate change in the 2050s will therefore depend on the developmental path followed by India. Therefore it is important to understand the current adaptation mechanisms and improve the coping capacities of the vulnerable section of the population by helping to enhance their accessibility to health services, improved surveillance and forecasting technologies. Keywords: Climate determinants, malaria incidence, P. falciparum, P. vivax, transmission window, vector. Citedy By: 149 Sustainable development in Pakistan in the context of energy consumption demand and environmental degradation Author: Sustainable development in Pakistan in the context of energy consumption demand and environmental degradation, Journal: Journal of Asian Economics ,Vol.18(5),2007--Pages Abstract: The aim of this paper is to analyze the impact of population growth, economic growth, energy intensity (EI) growth and urbanization growth on environmental degradation in Pakistan. The paper will investigate simultaneously the effect of population growth, urbanization, energy consumption and environmental degradation on the sustainable economic growth as well. To ensure the sustainable development of the economy environmental degradation should not increase with time but be reduced or at least remain constant. If it increases, we will move further away for sustainability, while if it decreases, we will move closer towards it. The results indicate that 1% increase in GDP growth leads to 0.84% increase in growth rate of carbon dioxide emissions, and an increase of 1% in the energy intensity growth rate causes almost 0.24% increases in growth rate of CO2emissions. As far as results of co-integrating vector normalized on GDP growth is concerned, the coefficients of EI growth and CO2emissions growth are found to be affecting the level of development significantly and positively by 0.3% and 1.2%, respectively. This indicates that in Pakistan process of economic development is dependent on the level of energy use and the resultant of this energy use, CO2emissions caused economic growth significantly and positively. In addition to the rapid urbanization and increased population growth affect positively to environmental degradation while negatively and significantly to the economic development in the long run. Keywords: Economic growth Environmental degradation CO2emission Energy intensity Urbanization Citedy By: 80 Corporate Carbon Strategies in Responding to Climate Change Author: Su-yol Lee Journal: Business Strategy and the Environment,,Vol.21(1),2012--Pages Abstract: With climate change emerging as one of the most important issues affecting the business circle, companies have begun considering the carbon issue in their overall strategic positioning. However, few studies have examined the corporate carbon strategies in developing and advanced developing countries, where climate change regulation is extensive and market uncertainty is relatively high. In addition, there has been growing interest among researchers and practitioners concerning the relationship between the carbon strategy and firm performance. This paper presents a framework for identifying the corporate carbon strategy. The cluster analysis of 241 Korean companies indicates six types of corporate carbon strategy: wait-and-see observer, cautious reducer, product enhancer, all-round enhancer, emergent explorer and all-round explorer. This study empirically examines whether there are differences between these carbon strategy types in terms of the sector, firm size and firm performance. The results indicate a significant relationship between a firm's carbon strategy and its sector and size but a significant relationship between the carbon strategy and firm performance is not confirmed. Copyright 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment. Keywords: Citedy By: 89 Climate change and malaria transmission Author: SW Lindsay,MH Birley Journal: Annals of Tropical Medicine & Parasitology ,Vol.90(5),1996--Pages Abstract: There is a consensus among climatologists that our planet is experiencing a progressive rise in surface temperature due to the increased production of greenhouse gases. Some of the possible consequences of elevated temperature on malaria transmission are examined in the present review. A simple mathematical model is first used to examine the effect of temperature on the ability ofAnopheles maculipennisto transmit vivax malaria. This indicates that small increases in temperature at low temperatures may increase the risk of transmission substantially. This is important, since vulnerable communities, poorly protected by health services, in areas of unstable or no malaria are likely to be at increased risk of future outbreaks. In contrast, areas of stable transmission may be little affected by rising temperature. It is thought that global warming will lead to coastal flooding, changes in precipitation and, indirectly, changes in land use. Just how these changes will effect transmission at a regional level requires an understanding of the ecology of local vectors, since environmental changes which favour malaria transmission in one vector species may reduce it in another. Methods for predicting future changes in malaria in different regions are discussed, highlighting the need for further research in this area. Most importantly, there is a need for researchers to validate the accuracy of the models used for predicting malaria and to confirm the assumptions on which the models are based Keywords: Citedy By: 304 CLIMATE CHANGE AND VARIABILITY IN MOUNTAIN REGIONS OF PAKISTAN IMPLICATIONS FOR WATER AND AGRICULTURE Author: Syed Sajidin Hussain , Muhammad Mudasser, Muhammad Munir Sheikh, Naeem Manzoor Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology,Vol.2(4),2005--Pages Abstract: This paper analyzes climate variability in the mountain areas of Pakistan covering winter dominated high mountain region and monsoon dominated sub-mountain region and on the bases of these analyses, discusses implications for water and agriculture for the country. Trend analyses of the historical data for the period 1971-2000 show that winter season temperatures have increased in both submountain and high mountain region during the past 30 years. Relatively higher increase in maximum winter temperatures was observed, whereas minimum temperatures during winter showed a slight decline. These results suggest that days have become warmer whereas nights have become cooler during the winter season in the high mountain areas. Monsoon temperatures (particularly maximum temperatures) have also increased in both the regions. More interestingly, maximum temperatures in the transitional periods October-November and April-May particularly in the high-mountain areas are at a rising trend. All these changes and seasonal variations have important implications for water resources and agriculture in the mountain areas in particular and for Pakistan in general. The results indicate that the maximum temperatures have increased all around the year particularly in the high mountain region during the last 30 years. Winter temperatures have increased in both sub-mountain and high-mountain regions during this period. Rainfall has also increased in both regions. The paper concludes that the increasing trends in temperature in the high mountain areas may have some positive impact on crop area and yields. However, these rising temperature trends may increase the melting of glaciers and snow, reduce snow accumulation during winter and enhance the overall de-glaciations process and therefore could well endanger the countrys sustained sources of fresh water from glaciers and snow melting. Detailed analysis is however recommended to assess the impact of climatic variability and change on water and agriculture in the mountain areas. Keywords: Citedy By: 23 Prospects for wheat production under changing climate in mountain areas of Pakistan An econometric analysis Author: Syed Sajidin Hussain,Muhammad Mudasser Journal: Agricultural Systems,Vol.94(2),2007--Pages Abstract: We assess potential future impacts of climate change on wheat yields in Swat and Chitral districts of Pakistan, mountainous areas with average altitudes of 960 and 1500m above sea level, respectively. Using past climate data (19762000) to track temperature trends in both study districts, we find that increased temperatures correspond to an increase in Growing Degree Days (GDDs) and a decrease in Growing Season Length (GSL). Chitral district shows a stronger decline in season length than Swat district. Compared with the estimated optimum level of 157 days, the 25 year average GSL for the dominant varieties is estimated to be 156 days in Swat district and 195 days in Chitral district. Future increases in temperature of 1.5 and 3C are likely to cause wheat yields to decline (by 7% and 24% respectively) in Swat district and increase (by 14% and 23% respectively) in Chitral district. Future increases in precipitation of 515% during the growing season show a negligible impact on wheat yield. Development and dissemination of short duration varieties, which can withstand the climatic anomalies expected in the future, should be given priority in the mountain region. More recent High Yielding Varieties (HYV) of the warmer plain areas should also be tested and introduced in the mountain areas because the expected future increases in temperatures caused by global warming would render these varieties suitable for the mountain areas. Keywords: Climate change impact Wheat yield Mountain areas Growing season length Transcendental model Chitral Swat Pakistan Citedy By: 66 Uncertain predictions, invisible impacts, and the need to mainstream gender in climate change adaptations Author: V Nelson, K Meadows,T Cannon,J Morton Journal: Gender & Development,Vol.10(2),2002--Pages Abstract: Vulnerability to environmental degradation and natural hazards is articulated along social, poverty, and gender lines. Just as gender is not sufficiently mainstreamed in many areas of development policy and practice, so the potential impacts of climate change on gender relations have not been studied, and remain invisible. In this article we outline climate change predictions, and explore the effects of long-term climate change on agriculture, ecological systems, and gender relations, since these could be significant. We identify predicted changes in natural hazard frequency and intensity as a result of climate change, and explore the gendered effects of natural hazards. We highlight the urgent need to integrate gender analyses into public policy-making, and in adaptation responses to climate change. Keywords: Citedy By: 158 Paleoclimatic Inferences from Long Tree-Ring Records Author: Valmore C. LaMarche Jr Journal: Science,Vol.183(4129),1974--Pages Abstract: Tree-ring data contribute to a better understanding of the nature of past climatic variations. Annual ring records several thousand years long can be constructed for a few areas, but interpretation of them requires the development of new approaches. For example, a single record of average ring width in the upper tree line environment provides a guide to past temperature fluctuations. However, comparison of this record with another, that of the arid lower forest border, from the same area permits characterization of associated precipitation and temperature anomalies that may, in turn, be linked to features of the general circulation. Other approaches that promise to be very fruitful include study of the variation of ring-width statistics through time, investigation of the physical and chemical properties of wood, and combined multivariate analysis of data for a variety of paleoclimatic indicators. Keywords: Citedy By: 491 A survey of urban climate change experiments in 100 cities Author: VC Broto,H Bulkeley Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.23(1),2013--Pages Abstract: Cities are key sites where climate change is being addressed. Previous research has largely overlooked the multiplicity of climate change responses emerging outside formal contexts of decision-making and led by actors other than municipal governments. Moreover, existing research has largely focused on case studies of climate change mitigation in developed economies. The objective of this paper is to uncover the heterogeneous mix of actors, settings, governance arrangements and technologies involved in the governance of climate change in cities in different parts of the world. The paper focuses on urban climate change governance as a process of experimentation. Climate change experiments are presented here as interventions to try out new ideas and methods in the context of future uncertainties. They serve to understand how interventions work in practice, in new contexts where they are thought of as innovative. To study experimentation, the paper presents evidence from the analysis of a database of 627 urban climate change experiments in a sample of 100 global cities. The analysis suggests that, since 2005, experimentation is a feature of urban responses to climate change across different world regions and multiple sectors. Although experimentation does not appear to be related to particular kinds of urban economic and social conditions, some of its core features are visible. For example, experimentation tends to focus on energy. Also, both social and technical forms of experimentation are visible, but technical experimentation is more common in urban infrastructure systems. While municipal governments have a critical role in climate change experimentation, they often act alongside other actors and in a variety of forms of partnership. These findings point at experimentation as a key tool to open up new political spaces for governing climate change in the city. Keywords: Climate change experiments; Mitigation;Adaptation;Governance;Cities;Infrastructure Gadget timed out while loading Citedy By: 283 Modelling Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Strategies for Sunflower in Pakistan Author: W Nasim, H Belhouchette,A Ahmad Journal: Outlook on Agriculture ,Vol.45(1),2016--Pages Abstract: Climate change, food security, water scarcity and environmental sustainability have all become major global challenges. As a consequence, improving resource use efficiency is an important aspect of increasing crop productivity. Crop models are increasingly being used as tools for supporting strategic and tactical decision making under varying agro-climatic and socioeconomic conditions. These tools can also support climate change assessment and the evaluation of adaptation strategies to limit the adverse impacts of climate change. In this paper, the authors report on a case study conducted to assess the potential impact of climate change on grain yield in sunflower under arid, semi-arid and subhumid conditions in the Punjab region of Pakistan. Experimental data obtained between 2008 and 2009 were used for model evaluation. The study focused on the impacts of incremental temperature change on sunflower production. The modelling suggests that grain yield could reduce by up to 15% by the 2020s with an average increase in temperature of +1C, and by up to 25% if temperatures increased by up to 2C for the 2050s. Adaptation strategies showed that, if the crop were sown between 14 days (for 2020) and 21 days (for 2050) earlier than the current date (last week in February), yield losses could potentially be reduced. Keywords: Citedy By: 8 Climate change and groundwater: a short review Author: W. DragoniandB. S. Sukhija Journal: Geological Society, London,Vol.1(12),2008--Pages Abstract: There is a general consensus that climate change is an ongoing phenomenon. This will inevitably bring about numerous environmental problems, including alterations to the hydrological cycle, which is already heavily influenced by anthropogenic activity. The available climate scenarios indicate areas where rainfall may increase or diminish, but the final outcome with respect to man and environment will, generally, be detrimental. Groundwater will be vital to alleviate some of the worst drought situations. The paper analyses the main methods for studying the relationships between climate change and groundwater, and presents the main areas in which hydrogeological research should focus in order to mitigate the likely impacts. Keywords: Citedy By: 103 Abrupt climate change: causal constraints provided by the paleoclimate record Author: W.S Broecker Journal: Earth-Science Reviews,Vol.51(1-4),2000--Pages Abstract: Important aspects of the physics involved in the climate changes of late Quaternary time elude us. The paleoclimatic record documents in detail that these changes were vast and in many cases happened abruptly. Every element of the global climate system was involved. While a case can be made that these reorganizations of the ocean's thermohaline circulation acted as the trigger for these jumps, no one has as yet been able to articulate exactly how it is that these reorganizations are capable of inducing such large changes in the way in which the atmosphere operates, In this review, I point out what to me are the key constraints placed by the records kept in ice and in sediments. The timing of these changes suggests that they have been paced by seasonality changes related to periodicities in the Earth's orbital elements and by a curious 1500-year cycle imprinted on sediments in the northern Atlantic. But as these pacemakers are inherently weak, in order for them to generate what we see in the record, there must exist powerful and likely nonlinear feedbacks in the system. It is my hope that by bringing together this information, I will provide an impetus for creative thinking with regard to physical scenarios capable of illuminating these feedbacks. Not only is this the crucial step in understanding our past, but it is also a necessary step if we are to properly evaluate the possible consequences of the ongoing greenhouse gas buildup. Keywords: causal constraints paleoclimateclimate change Citedy By: 222 Dryland ecohydrology and climate change: critical issues and technical advances Author: Wang, L., D'Odorico, P., Evans, J. P., Eldridge, D. J., McCabe, M. F., et al. Journal: Hydrology and Earth System Sciences;,Vol.16(8),2012--Pages Abstract: Drylands cover about 40 % of the terrestrial land surface and account for approximately 40 % of global net primary productivity. Water is fundamental to the biophysical processes that sustain ecosystem function and food production, particularly in drylands where a tight coupling exists between ecosystem productivity, surface energy balance, biogeochemical cycles, and water resource availability. Currently, drylands support at least 2 billion people and comprise both natural and managed ecosystems. In this synthesis, we identify some current critical issues in the understanding of dryland systems and discuss how arid and semiarid environments are responding to the changes in climate and land use. The issues range from societal aspects such as rapid population growth, the resulting food and water security, and development issues, to natural aspects such as ecohydrological consequences of bush encroachment and the causes of desertification. To improve current understanding and inform upon the needed research efforts to address these critical issues, we identify some recent technical advances in terms of monitoring dryland water dynamics, water budget and vegetation water use, with a focus on the use of stable isotopes and remote sensing. These technological advances provide new tools that assist in addressing critical issues in dryland ecohydrology under climate change. Keywords: Citedy By: 93 Adapting North American agriculture to climate change in review Author: William EEasterling Journal: Agricultural and Forest Meteorology,Vol.80(1),1996--Pages Abstract: The adaptability of North American agriculture to climate change is assessed through a review of current literature. A baseline of North American agriculture without climate change suggests that farming faces serious challenges in the future (e.g. declining domestic demand, loss of comparative advantage, rising environmental costs). Climate change adjustments at the farm-level and in government policy, including international trade policy, are inventoried from the literature. The adaptive potential of agriculture is demonstrated historically with situations that are analogous to climate change, including the translocation of crops across natural climate gradients, the rapid introduction of new crops such as soybeans in the US and canola in Canada, and resource substitutions prompted by changes in prices of production inputs. A wide selection of modeling studies is reviewed which, in net, suggests several agronomic and economic adaptation strategies that are available to agriculture. Agronomic strategies include changes in crop varieties and species, timing of operations, and land management including irrigation. Economic strategies include investment in new technologies, infrastructure and labor, and shifts in international trade. Overall, such agronomic strategies were found to offset either partially or completely the loss of productivity caused by climate change. Economic adaptations were found to render the agricultural costs of climate change small by comparison with the overall expansion of agricultural production. New avenues of adaptive research are recommended including the formalization of the incorporation of adaptation strategies into modeling, linkage of adaptation to the terrestrial carbon cycle, anticipation of future technologies, attention to scaling from in situ modeling to the landscape scale, expansion of data sets and the measurement and modeling of unpriced costs. The final assessment is that climate change should not pose an insurmountable obstacle to North American agriculture. The portfolio of assets needed to adapt is large in terms of land, water, energy, genetic diversity, physical infrastructure and human resources, research capacity and information systems, and political institutions and world tradethe research reviewed here gives ample evidence of the ability of agriculture to utilize such assets. In conclusion, the apparent efficiency with which North American agriculture may adapt to climate changes provides little inducement for diverting agricultural adaptation resources to efforts to slow or halt the climate changes Keywords: Citedy By: 165 The 2010 Pakistan Flood and Russian Heat Wave: Teleconnection of Hydrometeorological Extremes Author: WKM Lau, KM Kim - Journal: Journal of Hydrometeorology,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: In this paper, preliminary results are presented showing that the two record-setting extreme events during 2010 summer (i.e., the Russian heat wavewildfires and Pakistan flood) were physically connected. It is found that the Russian heat wave was associated with the development of an extraordinarily strong and prolonged extratropical atmospheric blocking event in association with the excitation of a large-scale atmospheric Rossby wave train spanning western Russia, Kazakhstan, and the northwestern ChinaTibetan Plateau region. The southward penetration of upper-level vorticity perturbations in the leading trough of the Rossby wave was instrumental in triggering anomalously heavy rain events over northern Pakistan and vicinity in mid- to late July. Also shown are evidences that the Russian heat wave was amplified by a positive feedback through changes in surface energy fluxes between the atmospheric blocking pattern and an underlying extensive land region with below-normal soil moisture. The Pakistan heavy rain events were amplified and sustained by strong anomalous southeasterly flow along the Himalayan foothills and abundant moisture transport from the Bay of Bengal in connection with the northward propagation of the monsoonal intrapersonal oscillation. Keywords: Atmosphere-land interaction;Blocking;Deep convection;Energy transport;Teleconnections;Vertical motion Citedy By: 139 Social Vulnerability to Climate Change and Extremes in Coastal Vietnam Author: WN Adger Journal: World Development,Vol.27(2),1999--Pages Abstract: A framework for analyzing social vulnerability is outlined, an aspect largely underemphasized in assessments of the impacts of climate change and climate extremes. Vulnerability is defined in this paper as the exposure of individuals or collective groups to livelihood stress as a result of the impacts of such environmental change. It is constituted by individual and collective aspects which can be disaggregated, but are linked through the political economy of markets and institutions. Research in coastal northern Vietnam shows that baseline social vulnerability is enhanced by some institutional and economic factors associated with Vietnam's economic transition from central planning, namely the breakdown of collective action on protection from extreme events and an increasingly skewed income. Offsetting these trends are other institutional changes associated with the dynamic nature of the economic restructuring and evolution of the market transition in Vietnam, which decrease vulnerability. Keywords: Citedy By: 1163 Climate Change Will Affect the Asian Water Towers Author: WW Immerzeel, LPH Van Beek,MFP Bierkens Journal: Science ,Vol.328(5984),2010--Pages Abstract: More than 1.4 billion people depend on water from the Indus, Ganges, Brahmaputra, Yangtze, and Yellow rivers. Upstream snow and ice reserves of these basins, important in sustaining seasonal water availability, are likely to be affected substantially by climate change, but to what extent is yet unclear. Here, we show that meltwater is extremely important in the Indus basin and important for the Brahmaputra basin, but plays only a modest role for the Ganges, Yangtze, and Yellow rivers. A huge difference also exists between basins in the extent to which climate change is predicted to affect water availability and food security. The Brahmaputra and Indus basins are most susceptible to reductions of flow, threatening the food security of an estimated 60 million people Keywords: Citedy By: 1046 The vegetation and climate change during Neocene and Early Quaternary in Jiuxi Basin, China Author: XiaominFang,JijunLi,FuliWu,JunZhang,YuzhenMa, Journal: Science in China Series D: Earth Sciences,Vol.(),2005--Pages Abstract: Sporopollen record in the Laojunmiao Section at Yumen in the Hexi Corridor foreland depression at the northern margin of the Tibetan Plateau revealed that during the period of 13.011.15 Ma the ecological environment of the Jiuxi Basin is characterized by steppe vegetation and a semi-moist climate. During 11.168.60 Ma prevailed forests of cypress and a still warmer, moister climate; steppe vegetation and dry climate began probably at about 8.6 Ma. Although aridification had been relaxed time and again during 8.406.93 Ma (forest-steppe, warm-semi-moist), 6.645.67 Ma (open-forest and steppe, warmer-semi-moist) and 5.424.96 Ma (steppe, semi-arid), the climate in the region became drier and drier in response to the fre-quent occurrence of aridity during 6.936.64 Ma (steppe, semi-arid), 5.675.42 Ma (de-sert-steppe, arid), 3.663.30 Ma (desert-steppe, arid) and 2.562.21 Ma (desert, arid). Perhaps the important findings of our study are the notable expansion of drought-enduring plants during 3.663.30 Ma and about 2.56 Ma and the replacement of vegetation by vast arid desert. Keywords: Tibetan PlateauHexi Corridorsporopollen recordecological environmentvegetation evolutionaridification Citedy By: 58 Multimodel projections and uncertainties of irrigation water demand under climate change Author: Y Wada,D Wisser,S Eisner,M Flrke Journal: Geophysical Research Letters,Vol.40(17),2013--Pages Abstract: Crop irrigation is responsible for 70% of humanity's water demand. Since the late 1990s, the expansion of irrigated areas has been tapering off, and this trend is expected to continue in the future. Future irrigation water demand (IWD) is, however, subject to large uncertainties due to anticipated climate change. Here, we use a set of seven global hydrological models (GHMs) to quantify the impact of projected global climate change on IWD on currently irrigated areas by the end of this century, and to assess the resulting uncertainties arising from both the GHMs and climate projections. The resulting ensemble projections generally show an increasing trend in future IWD, but the increase varies substantially depending on the degree of global warming and associated regional precipitation changes. Under the highest greenhouse gas emission scenario (RCP8.5), IWD will considerably increase during the summer in the Northern Hemisphere (>20% by 2100), and the present peak IWD is projected to shift one month or more over regions where =80% of the global irrigated areas exist and 4 billion people currently live. Uncertainties arising from GHMs and global climate models (GCMs) are large, with GHM uncertainty dominating throughout the century and with GCM uncertainty substantially increasing from the midcentury, indicating the choice of GHM outweighing by far the uncertainty arising from the choice of GCM and associated emission scenario. Keywords: Citedy By: 102 Large-scale hydrological change drove the late Miocene C4 plant expansion in the Himalayan foreland and Arabian Peninsula Author: Yongsong Huang,,Steven C. Clemens,,Weiguo Liu,,Yi Wang,,Warren L. Prell, Journal: Geology, 2007,Vol.35(6),2007--Pages Abstract: Carbon isotope changes in paleosols from Siwalik, Pakistan, and marine sediments from the Bengal Fan indicate a major C4plant expansion in the Himalayan foreland during the late Miocene. However, the timing and mechanisms behind the C4plant expansion remain enigmatic. Here we present high-resolution (~60 k.y.) biomarker and compound-specific isotope data spanning the past 11 m.y. from Ocean Drilling Program Site 722 in the Arabian Sea. An~56 increase in leaf wax d13C values indicates a marked rise of C4plants from 10 to 5.5 Ma, with accelerated expansion from 7.9 to 5.5 Ma. A concurrent ~50 rise in leaf wax dD values is attributed to a combined effect of changes in precipitation amount and evaporation, indicating that source regions for the plant waxes became progressively drier from 10 to 5.5 Ma. In contrast to earlier reports, our isotope records, biomarker abundances, alkenone UK'37, andGlobigerina bulloidesabundance data do not suggest enhanced summer monsoon circulation during this time interval. Rather, our results suggest that large-scale hydrological changes drove the late Miocene expansion of C4plants in the Himalayan foreland and Arabian Peninsula. Keywords: Citedy By: 117 Planning the resilient city: Concepts and strategies for coping with climate change and environmental risk Author: Yosef Jabareen Journal: Cities ,Vol.31(),2013--Pages Abstract: This paper contributes to filling the theoretical and practical gaps of city resilience literature, which lacks multifaceted theorizing and typically overlooks the multidisciplinary and complex nature of urban resilience. Furthermore, most studies on the subject make use of general, vague, and confusing terminology. This paper suggests a new innovative conceptual framework (the Resilient City Planning Framework or RCPF) that addresses the critical question of what cities and their urban communities should do in order to move towards a more resilient state in the future. Accordingly, the RCPF takes complexity and uncertainty into account. It is affected by a multiplicity of economic, social, spatial, and physical factors and its planning involves a wide range of stakeholders. RCPF is a network of four interlinked concepts that together, provide a comprehensive understanding of City Resilience. Keywords: Urban resilience Climate change Environmental risks Planning Citedy By: 162 Hydrology of mountainous areas in the upper Indus Basin, Northern Pakistan with the perspective of climate change Author: ZulfiqarAhmad, MohsinHafeez, IftikharAhmad. Journal: Environmental Monitoring and Assessment,Vol.184(9),2012--Pages Abstract: Mountainous areas in the northern Pakistan are blessed by numerous rivers that have great potential in water resources and hydropower production. Many of these rivers are unexploited for their water resource potential. If the potential of these rivers are explored, hydropower production and water supplies in these areas may be improved. The Indus is the main river originating from mountainous area of the Himalayas of Baltistan, Pakistan in which most of the smaller streams drain. In this paper, the hydrology of the mountainous areas in northern Pakistan is studied to estimate flow pattern, long-term trend in river flows, characteristics of the watersheds, and variability in flow and water resource due to impact of climate change. Eight watersheds including Gilgit, Hunza, Shigar, Shyok, Astore, Jhelum, Swat, and Chitral, Pakistan have been studied from 1960 to 2005 to monitor hydrological changes in relation to variability in precipitation, temperature and mean monthly flows, trend of snow melt runoff, analysis of daily hydrographs, water yield and runoff relationship, and flow duration curves. Precipitation from ten meteorological stations in mountainous area of northern Pakistan showed variability in the winter and summer rains and did not indicate a uniform distribution of rains. Review of mean monthly temperature of ten stations suggested that the Upper Indus Basin can be categorized into three hydrological regimes, i.e., high-altitude catchments with large glacierized parts, middle-altitude catchments south of Karakoram, and foothill catchments. Analysis of daily runoff data (19602005) of eight watersheds indicated nearly a uniform pattern with much of the runoff in summer (JuneAugust). Impact of climate change on long-term recorded annual runoff of eight watersheds showed fair water flows at the Hunza and Jhelum Rivers while rest of the rivers indicated increased trends in runoff volumes. The study of the water yield availability indicated a minimum trend in Shyok River at Yogo and a maximum trend in Swat River at Kalam. Long-term recorded data used to estimate flow duration curves have shown a uniform trend and are important for hydropower generation for Pakistan which is seriously facing power crisis in last 5years. Keywords: Eight watershedsClimate changeHimalayan RegionsHunzaShyokAstoreRecent floodsThe Indus River Citedy By: 19 A 5000-yr record ofclimate changein varved sediments from the oxygen minimum zone offPakistan, Northeastern Arabian Sea Author: U Von Rad, M Schaaf, KH Michels, H Schulz Journal: QuaternaryResearch,Vol.51(1),1999--Pages Abstract: The upper Holocene marine section from a kasten core taken from the oxygen minimum zone off Karachi (Pakistan) at water depth 700 m contains continuously laminated sediments with a sedimentation rate of 1.2 mm/yr and a unique record of monsoonal climatic Keywords: Citedy By: 283 Vulnerability of water resources, vegetation productivity and soil erosion to climate change in Mediterranean watersheds Author: lia Seixas,Nuno Ricardo Pacheco,Joo Pedro Nunes, Journal: Hydrological Processes,Vol.22(16),2008--Pages Abstract: Climate change is expected to increase temperatures and lower rainfall in Mediterranean regions; however, there is a great degree of uncertainty as to the amount of change. This limits the prediction capacity of models to quantify impacts on water resources, vegetation productivity and erosion. This work circumvents this problem by analysing the sensitivity of these variables to varying degrees of temperature change (increased by up to 64 C), rainfall (reduced by up to 40%) and atmospheric CO2concentrations (increased by up to 100%). The SWAT watershed model was applied to 18 large watersheds in two contrasting regions of Portugal, one humid and one semi-arid; incremental changes to climate variables were simulated using a stochastic weather generator. The main results indicate that water runoff, particularly subsurface runoff, is highly sensitive to these climate change trends (down by 80%). The biomass growth of most species showed a declining trend (wheat down by 40%), due to the negative impacts of increasing temperatures, dampened by higher CO2concentrations. Mediterranean species, however, showed a positive response to milder degrees of climate change. Changes to erosion depended on the interactions between the decline in surface runoff (driving erosion rates downward) and biomass growth (driving erosion rates upward). For the milder rainfall changes, soil erosion showed a significant increasing trend in wheat fields (up to 150% in the humid watersheds), well above the recovery capacity of the soil. Overall, the results indicate a shift of the humid watersheds to acquire semi-arid characteristics, such as more irregular river flows and increasingly marginal conditions for agricultural production. Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Keywords: Citedy By: 82 Network political ecology: Method and theory inclimate changevulnerability and adaptation research Author: Trevor Birkenholtz Journal: Progress in Human Geography,Vol.36(3),2012--Pages Abstract: This paper argues for the development of network political ecology, drawing on the insights from regional political ecology and recent advancements in network theories of scale, to meet the challenges of investigating the meso-scale problem of vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. Network political ecology, attentive to scale as socio-ecologically produced and grounded in a regional resource use system, is one such approach that fills this gap in middle-range theory necessary to understand the complex processes through which vulnerability manifests and adaptive capacity is produced. This method is exemplified through the case of groundwater-dependent irrigating farmers in Rajasthan, India. Keywords: Citedy By: 64 Urban Health Inequities and the Added Pressure of Climate Change: An Action-Oriented Research Agenda Author: TrevorHancock,TordKjellstrom,GordonMcGranahan,PatriciaMonge,JoyashreeRoy,SharonFriel, Journal: Journal of Urban Health,Vol.(),2011--Pages Abstract: Climate change will likely exacerbate already existing urban social inequities and health risks, thereby exacerbating existing urban health inequities. Cities in low- and middle-income countries are particularly vulnerable. Urbanization is both a cause of and potential solution to global climate change. Most population growth in the foreseeable future will occur in urban areas primarily in developing countries. How this growth is managed has enormous implications for climate change given the increasing concentration and magnitude of economic production in urban localities, as well as the higher consumption practices of urbanites, especially the middle classes, compared to rural populations. There is still much to learn about the extent to which climate change affects urban health equity and what can be done effectively in different socio-political and socio-economic contexts to improve the health of urban dwelling humans and the environment. But it is clear that equity-oriented climate change adaptation means attention to the social conditions in which urban populations livethis is not just a climate change policy issue, it requires inter-sectoral action. Policies and programs in urban planning and design, workplace health and safety, and urban agriculture can help mitigate further climate change and adapt to existing climate change. If done well, these will also be good for urban health equity. Keywords: Urban healthHealth inequityClimate changeEvidence Citedy By: 37 Climate change and groundwater: India's opportunities for mitigation and adaptation Author: Tushaar Shah Journal: Environmental Research Letters,Vol.(),2009--Pages Abstract: For millennia, India used surface storage and gravity flow to water crops. During the last 40years, however, India has witnessed a decline in gravity-flow irrigation and the rise of a booming 'water-scavenging' irrigation economy through millions of small, private tubewells. For India, groundwater has become at once critical and threatened. Climate change will act as a force multiplier; it will enhance groundwater's criticality for drought-proofing agriculture and simultaneously multiply the threat to the resource. Groundwater pumping with electricity and diesel also accounts for an estimated 1625 million mt of carbon emissions, 46% of India's total. From a climate change point of view, India's groundwater hotspots are western and peninsular India. These are critical for climate change mitigation as well as adaptation. To achieve both, India needs to make a transition from surface storage to 'managed aquifer storage' as the center pin of its water strategy with proactive demand- and supply-side management components. In doing this, India needs to learn intelligently from the experience of countries like Australia and the United States that have long experience in managed aquifer recharge. Keywords: Citedy By: 152 Climate change-induced migration and violent conflict Author: R Reuveny Journal: Political Geography,Vol.26(6),2007--Pages Abstract: In a world of rising sea levels and melting glaciers, climate change is most likely occurring but with uncertain overall effects. I argue that we can predict the effects of climate change on migration by exploring the effects of environmental problems on migration in recent decades. People can adapt to these problems by staying in place and doing nothing, staying in place and mitigating the problems, or leaving the affected areas. The choice between these options will depend on the extent of problems and mitigation capabilities. People living in lesser developed countries may be more likely to leave affected areas, which may cause conflict in receiving areas. My findings support this theory, and suggest certain policy implications for climate change. Keywords: Climate change Migration Conflict Citedy By: 606 Predicting impacts of climate change on medicinal asclepiads of Pakistan using Maxent modeling Author: R Khanum,AS Mumtaz,S Kumar Journal: Acta Oecologica,Vol.49(),2013--Pages Abstract: Maximum entropy (Maxent) modeling was used to predict the potential climatic niches of three medicinally important Asclepiad species:Pentatropis spiralis,Tylophora hirsuta,andVincetoxicum arnottianum. All three species are members of the Asclepiad plant family, yet they differ in ecological requirements, biogeographic importance, and conservation value. Occurrence data were collected from herbarium specimens held in major herbaria of Pakistan and two years (2010 and 2011) of field surveys. The Maxent model performed better than random for the three species with an average test AUC value of 0.74 forP.spiralis, 0.84 forV.arnottianum, and 0.59 forT.hirsuta. Under the future climate change scenario, the Maxent model predicted habitat gains forP.spiralisin southern Punjab and Balochistan, and loss of habitat in south-eastern Sindh.Vincetoxicum arnottianumas well asT.hirsutawould gain habitat in upper Peaks of northern parts of Pakistan.T.hirsutais predicted to lose most of the habitats in northern Punjab and in parches from lower peaks of Galliat, Zhob, Qalat etc. The predictive modeling approach presented here may be applied to other rare Asclepiad species, especially those under constant extinction threat. Keywords: Climate change Niche modeling Maxent Species distribution modeling Species vulnerability Risk analysis Citedy By: 50 The distributional impact of climate change on rich and poor countries Author: R Mendelsohn,A Dinar, L Williams Journal: Development Economics,Vol.11(2),2006--Pages Abstract: This paper examines the impact of climate change on rich and poor countries across the world. We measure two indices of the relative impact of climate across countries, impact per capita, and impact per GDP. These measures sum market impacts across the climate-sensitive economic sectors of each country. Both indices reveal that climate change will have serious distributional impact across countries, grouped by income per capita. We predict that poor countries will suffer the bulk of the damages from climate change. Although adaptation, wealth, and technology may influence distributional consequences across countries, we argue that the primary reason that poor countries are so vulnerable is their location. Countries in the low latitudes start with very high temperatures. Further warming pushes these countries ever further away from optimal temperatures for climate-sensitive economic sectors. Keywords: Citedy By: 387 SWSoil and Water: Climate Change and Water Resources Management in Arid and Semi-arid Regions: Prospective and Challenges for the 21st Century Author: R Ragab,C Prudhomme Journal: Biosystems Engineering,Vol.81(1),2002--Pages Abstract: The overgrowing population and the recent droughts are putting water resources under pressure and calling for new approaches for water planning and management if escalating conflicts are to be avoided and environmental degradation is to be reversed. As countries are using their water resources with growing intensity, poor rainfall increasingly leads to national water crises as water tables fall and reservoirs, wetlands and rivers empty. Global warming could cause further changes, further variability and further uncertainty. The UK Hadley Centre's global climate model was run at a spatial scale of 25 by 375 (latitude and longitude) grid squares to simulate the global climate according to scenarios of greenhouse gas concentration emission. Runs of the model assuming the emission scenario proposed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 1995 are analysed here for the 2050s time horizon. Outputs provide estimations of climate variables, such as precipitation and temperature, at a monthly time step. Those results, assumed representative of future climatic conditions, are compared to mean monthly values representative of the current climate and expressed in terms of percentage change. The results show that, for the dry season (AprilSeptember), by the 2050s, North Africa and some parts of Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Syria, Jordan and Israel, are expected to have reduced rainfall amounts of 2025% less than the present mean values. This decrease in rainfall is accompanied by a temperature rise in those areas of between 2 and 275C. For the same period, the temperature in the coastal areas of the Mediterranean countries will rise by about 15C. In wintertime, the rainfall will decrease by about 1015% but would increase over the Sahara by about 25%. Given the low rainfall rate over the Sahara, the increase by 25% will not bring any significant amount of rain to the region. In wintertime, the temperature in the coastal areas will also increase but by only 15C on average, while inside the region it will increase by 17525C. In southern Africa (Angola, Namibia, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Botswana and South Africa), results suggest an increase of the annual average temperature ranging between 15 and 25C in the south to between 25 and 3C in the north. The summer range is between 175 and 225C in the south, and increases towards the north to between 275 and 30C while the winter range is between 125 and 2C in the south, and increases towards the north to between 25 and 275C. On the other hand, the annual average will decrease by 1015% in the south and by 510% in the north. The annual average decrease is 10%. However, some places will have an increase i.e. by 520% in South Africa in wintertime. In the Taklimakan region (Tarim Basin) west of China, the annual average temperature is shown to increase by 17525C. Annual average rainfall should increase by 5>25% in most of the region but decrease by 510% in some small parts. In summer, an increase by 515% is indicated in most of the region, and an increase by up to 25% or more during the wintertime.In the Thar Desert (IndiaPakistanAfghanistan), estimations suggest that the annual average increase in temperature ranges from 175 to 25C, ranging from 15 to 225C in winter and from 2 to 25C in summer. Annual average precipitation is shown to decrease by 525% in the region. The winter will have values closer to the annual average but the summer will have more decrease and most of the region will see a decrease closer to 25%.In the Aral Sea basin (Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan), estimates suggest an annual average increase in temperature ranging from 175 to 225C, higher in summer (between 2 and 275C) than in winter (between 15 and 2C). Rainfall should increase by 520% annually, in summer increasing by 510% in the north but decreasing by up to 5% in the south, while in wintertime, both south and north should undergo increases of 510% and 2025%, respectively. In Australia, results indicate an increase in the annual average temperature ranges of 115C in the south to 25275C in the north, slightly higher during the summer than in the winter. The summer range is between 1 and 2C in the south and increases towards the north to 2530C while the winter range is between 1 and 15C in the south, and increases towards the north to between 2 and 225C. Rainfall annual average is shown to decrease by 2025% in the south and by 510% in the north. Given the above-mentioned facts, in order to meet the water demands in the next century, some dams and water infrastructure will be built in some countries and a new paradigm by rethinking the water use with the aim of increasing the productive use of water will have to be adopted. Two approaches are needed: increasing the efficiency with which current needs are met and increasing the efficiency with which water is allocated among different uses. In addition, non-conventional sources of water supply such as reclaimed, recycled water and desalinated brackish water or seawater is expected to play an important role Keywords: Citedy By: 334 Security and climate change Author: J Barnett Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.13(1),2003--Pages Abstract: Despite it being the most studied and arguably most profound of global environmental change problems, there is relatively little research that explores climate change as a security issue. This paper systematically explores the range of possible connections between climate change and security, including national security considerations, human security concerns, military roles, and a discussion of the widely held assumption that climate change may trigger violent conflict. The paper explains the ways in which climate change is a security issue. It includes in its discussion issues to do with both mitigation and adaptation of climate change. Keywords: Climate change National security Human security Conflict Citedy By: 618 Global Climate Change and Emerging Infectious Diseases Author: JA Patz, PR Epstein, TA Burke, JM Balbus Journal: Jama, 1996,Vol.275(3),1996--Pages Abstract: Climatic factors influence the emergence and reemergence of infectious diseases, in addition to multiple human, biological, and ecological determinants. Climatologists have identified upward trends in global temperatures and now estimate an unprecedented rise of 2.0C by the year 2100. Of major concern is that these changes can affect the introduction and dissemination of many serious infectious diseases.The incidence of mosquito-borne diseases, including malaria, dengue, and viral encephalitides, are among those diseases most sensitive to climate. Climate change would directly affect disease transmission by shifting the vector's geographic range and increasing reproductive and biting rates and by shortening the pathogen incubation period. Climate-related increases in sea surface temperature and sea level can lead to higher incidence of water-borne infectious and toxin-related illnesses, such as cholera and shellfish poisoning. Human migration and damage to health infrastructures from the projected increase in climate variability could indirectly contribute to disease transmission. Human susceptibility to infections might be further compounded by malnutrition due to climate stress on agriculture and potential alterations in the human immune system caused by increased flux of ultraviolet radiation. Analyzing the role of climate in the emergence of human infectious diseases will require interdisciplinary cooperation among physicians, climatologists, biologists, and social scientists. Increased disease surveillance, integrated modeling, and use of geographically based data systems will afford more anticipatory measures by the medical community. Understanding the linkages between climatological and ecological change as determinants of disease emergence and redistribution will ultimately help optimize preventive strategies. Keywords: Citedy By: 688 Climate change and international tourism: A simulation study Author: JM Hamilton, DJ Maddison,RSJ Tol Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.15(3),2005--Pages Abstract: The literature on tourism and climate change lacks an analysis of the global changes in tourism demand. Here, a simulation model of international tourism is presented that fills that gap. The current pattern of international tourist flows is modelled using 1995 data on departures and arrivals for 207 countries. Using this basic model the impact on arrivals and departures through changes in population, per capita income and climate change are analysed. In the medium to long term, tourism will grow, however, the change from climate change is smaller than from population and income changes. Keywords: Tourism demand Climate change Global model Citedy By: 455 The impact of climate change on the water resources of HindukushKarakorumHimalaya region under different glacier coverage scenarios Author: M Akhtar,N Ahmad,MJ Booij Journal: Journal of Hydrology,Vol.355(1-4),2008--Pages Abstract: This paper presents estimates of water resources changes in three river basins in the HindukushKarakorumHimalaya (HKH) region associated with climate change. The present climate (19611990) and future climate SRES A2 scenario (20712100) are simulated by the PRECIS Regional Climate Model at a spatial resolution of 2525km. Two HBV models (i.e. HBV-Met and HBV-PRECIS) are designed to quantify the future discharge. HBV-Met is calibrated and validated with inputs from observed meteorological data while HBV-PRECIS is calibrated and validated with inputs from PRECIS RCM simulations for the current climate. The future precipitation and temperature series are constructed through the delta change approach in HBV-Met, while in HBV-PRECIS future precipitation and temperature series from PRECIS RCM are directly used. The future discharge is simulated for three stages of glacier coverage: 100% glaciers, 50% glaciers and 0% glaciers. Generally temperature and precipitation shows an increase towards the end of 21st century. The efficiencies of HBV-Met during calibration and validation are higher compared to the HBV-PRECIS efficiencies. In a changed climate, discharge will generally increase in both models for 100% and 50% glacier scenarios. For the 0% glacier scenario, HBV-Met predicts a drastic decrease in water resources (up to 94%) in contrast to HBV-PRECIS which shows only a decrease up to 15%. Huge outliers in annual maximum discharge simulated through HBV-Met indicate that hydrological conditions are not predicted perfectly through the delta change downscaling approach. The results for HBV-Met simply confirm that the quality of observed data in this region is poor. The HBV-PRECIS model results are indicative of the higher risk of flood problems under climate change. The climate change signals in all three river basins are similar however, there are differences in the evaluated future water resources estimated through HBV-Met, whereas in HBV-PRECIS the changes in water resources are similar. This shows that the transfer of climate change signals into hydrological changes is more consistent in HBV-PRECIS than in HBV-Met. One of the reasons of the poorer results of the delta change approach is that in this approach the frequency of rainy days is not changed and day to day variability in temperature is not correctly transferred. However more research is needed to evaluate the uncertainties in both downscaling approaches. Moreover, the dynamical downscaling approach needs to be tested with other RCMs and preferably to other river basins as well. Keywords: Regional climate model Delta change approach HBV model Climate change Glacier coverage HindukushKarakorumHimalaya region Citedy By: 294 The GLOBE climate legislation study: a review of climate change legislation in 66 countries: fourth edition Author: M Nachmany,S Fankhauser, T Townshend,M Collins Journal: Monograph (Report),Vol.(),2014--Pages Abstract: The GLOBE Climate Legislation Study is the most comprehensive audit of climate legislation across 66 countries, together responsible for around 88% of global manmade greenhouse gas emissions. It is produced by the Grantham Research Institute at the London School of Economics in collaboration with GLOBE International. The 4th edition of the Study was formally launched at the 2nd GLOBE Climate Legislation Summit held at the Senate of the United States of America and at the World Bank in Washington DC on 27th-28th February 2014. The next edition of the Climate Legislation Study will be launched in early 2015, covering legislation in 100 countries. Key messages from the 4th edition: ?Almost 500 climate laws have been passed in the 66 countries covered by the study; the direction of travel is clear; and encouragingly, it is developing countries and emerging markets, which are advancing climate change laws and regulation at the fastest pace. ?Even though the legislative progress is impressive, the cumulative ambition of these laws is not yet sufficient to limit global average temperature rise to 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels, the agreed goal of the international community. ?In order for a successful outcome in Paris in 2015 there is now extreme urgency to strengthen commitments, and for countries that have not yet passed climate change laws and/or regulations to do so. Keywords: Citedy By: 66 Climate change and world food security: a new assessment Author: M Parry, C Rosenzweig, A Iglesias, G Fischer Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.9(1),1999--Pages Abstract: Building on previous work quantitative estimates of climate change impacts on global food production have been made for the UK Hadley Centre's HadCM2 greenhouse gas only ensemble experiment and the more recent HadCM3 experiment (Hulme et al., 1999). The consequences for world food prices and the number of people at risk of hunger as defined by the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO, 1988) have also been assessed. Climate change is expected to increase yields at high and mid-latitudes, and lead to decreases at lower latitudes. This pattern becomes more pronounced as time progresses. The food system may be expected to accommodate such regional variations at the global level, with production, prices and the risk of hunger being relatively unaffected by the additional stress of climate change. By the 2080s the additional number of people at risk of hunger due to climate change is about 80 million people (10 million depending on which of the four HadCM2 ensemble members is selected). However, some regions (particularly the arid and sub-humid tropics) will be adversely affected. A particular example is Africa, which is expected to experience marked reductions in yield, decreases in production, and increases in the risk of hunger as a result of climate change. The continent can expect to have between 55 and 65 million extra people at risk of hunger by the 2080s under the HadCM2 climate scenario. Under the HadCM3 climate scenario the effect is even more severe, producing an estimated additional 70+ million people at risk of hunger in Africa. Keywords: Climate change Food security Crop yields Citedy By: 523 Global water crisis and future food security in an era of climate change Author: MA Hanjra,ME Qureshi Journal: Food Policy,Vol.35(5),2010--Pages Abstract: Food policy should serve humanity by advancing the humane goals of eradicating extreme poverty and hunger. However, these goals have recently been challenged by emerging forces including climate change, water scarcity, the energy crisis as well as the credit crisis. This paper analyses the overall role of these forces and population growth in redefining global food security. Specifically, global water supply and demand as well as the linkages between water supply and food security are examined. The analysis reveals that the water for food security situation is intricate and might get daunting if no action is taken. Investments are needed today for enhancing future food security; this requires action on several fronts, including tackling climate change, preserving land and conserving water, reducing the energy footprint in food systems, developing and adopting climate resilient varieties, modernising irrigation infrastructure, shoring up domestic food supplies, reforming international food trade, and responding to other global challenges. Keywords: Climate resilient Energy crisis Credit crisis Irrigation Food trade Prices Citedy By: 430 Effects ofclimate changeon global food production under SRES emissions and socio-economic scenarios Author: ML Parry, C Rosenzweig,A Iglesias - 2004 - Elsevier Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.14(1),2004--Pages Abstract: This paper analyses the global consequences to crop yields, production, and risk of hunger of linked socio-economic and climate scenarios. Potential impacts of climate change are estimated for climate change scenarios developed from the HadCM3 global climate model under the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) A1FI, A2, B1, and B2. Projected changes in yield are calculated using transfer functions derived from crop model simulations with observed climate data and projected climate change scenarios. The basic linked system (BLS) is used to evaluate consequent changes in global cereal production, cereal prices and the number of people at risk from hunger. The crop yield results elucidate the complex regional patterns of projected climate variables, CO2effects, and agricultural systems that contribute to aggregations of global crop production. The A1FI scenario, as expected with its large increase in global temperatures, exhibits the greatest decreases both regionally and globally in yields, especially by the 2080s. The contrast between the yield change in developed and developing countries is largest under the A2ac scenarios. Under the B1 and B2 scenarios, developed and developing countries exhibit less contrast in crop yield changes, with the B2 future crop yield changes being slightly more favourable than those of the B1 scenario.When crop yield results are introduced to the BLS world food trade system model, the combined model and scenario experiments demonstrate that the world, for the most part, appears to be able to continue to feed itself under the SRES scenarios during the rest of this century. However, this outcome is achieved through production in the developed countries (which mostly benefit from climate change) compensating for declines projected, for the most part, for developing nations. While global production appears stable, regional differences in crop production are likely to grow stronger through time, leading to a significant polarisation of effects, with substantial increases in prices and risk of hunger amongst the poorer nations, especially under scenarios of greater inequality (A1FI and A2).The use of the SRES scenarios highlights several non-linearities in the world food supply system, both in the biophysical sense, where the levels of atmospheric CO2tested reach new levels, and the socio-economic sense, where changes in population dynamics and economic and political structures complicate the translation of biophysical climate change impacts into social indices, such as the number of people at risk of hunger Keywords: Citedy By: 1496 Climate change and global water resources Author: Nigel W.Arnell Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.9(1),1999--Pages Abstract: By 2025, it is estimated that around 5 billion people, out of a total population of around 8 billion, will be living in countries experiencing water stress (using more than 20% of their available resources). Climate change has the potential to impose additional pressures in some regions. This paper describes an assessment of the implications of climate change for global hydrological regimes and water resources. It uses climate change scenarios developed from Hadley Centre climate simulations (HadCM2 and HadCM3), and simulates global river flows at a spatial resolution of 0.50.5 using a macro-scale hydrological model. Changes in national water resources are calculated, including both internally generated runoff and upstream imports, and compared with national water use estimates developed for the United Nations Comprehensive Assessment of the Freshwater Resources of the World. Although there is variation between scenarios, the results suggest that average annual runoff will increase in high latitudes, in equatorial Africa and Asia, and southeast Asia, and will decrease in mid-latitudes and most subtropical regions. The HadCM3 scenario produces changes in runoff which are often similar to those from the HadCM2 scenarios but there are important regional differences. The rise in temperature associated with climate change leads to a general reduction in the proportion of precipitation falling as snow, and a consequent reduction in many areas in the duration of snow cover. This has implications for the timing of streamflow in such regions, with a shift from spring snow melt to winter runoff. Under the HadCM2 ensemble mean scenario, the number of people living in countries with water stress would increase by 53 million by 2025 (relative to those who would be affected in the absence of climate change). Under the HadCM3 scenario, the number of people living in countries with water stress would rise by 113 million. However, by 2050 there would be a net reduction in populations in stressed countries under HadCM2 (of around 69 million), but an increase of 56 million under HadCM3. The study also showed that different indications of the impact of climate change on water resource stresses could be obtained using different projections of future water use. The paper emphasises the large range between estimates of impact, and also discusses the problems associated with the scale of analysis and the definition of indices of water resource impact. Keywords: Climate change Global water resources Global runoff Hydrological impacts of climate change Citedy By: 957 Climate change and global water resources: SRES emissions and socio-economic scenarios Author: NW Arnell Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.14(1),2004--Pages Abstract: In 1995, nearly 1400 million people lived in water-stressed watersheds (runoff less than 1000 m3/capita/year), mostly in south west Asia, the Middle East and around the Mediterranean. This paper describes an assessment of the relative effect of climate change and population growth on future global and regional water resources stresses, using SRES socio-economic scenarios and climate projections made using six climate models driven by SRES emissions scenarios. River runoff was simulated at a spatial resolution of 0.50.5 under current and future climates using a macro-scale hydrological model, and aggregated to the watershed scale to estimate current and future water resource availability for 1300 watersheds and small islands under the SRES population projections. The A2 storyline has the largest population, followed by B2, then A1 and B1 (which have the same population). In the absence of climate change, the future population in water-stressed watersheds depends on population scenario and by 2025 ranges from 2.9 to 3.3 billion people (3640% of the world's population). By 2055 5.6 billion people would live in water-stressed watersheds under the A2 population future, and only 3.4 billion under A1/B1. Climate change increases water resources stresses in some parts of the world where runoff decreases, including around the Mediterranean, in parts of Europe, central and southern America, and southern Africa. In other water-stressed parts of the worldparticularly in southern and eastern Asiaclimate change increases runoff, but this may not be very beneficial in practice because the increases tend to come during the wet season and the extra water may not be available during the dry season. The broad geographic pattern of change is consistent between the six climate models, although there are differences of magnitude and direction of change in southern Asia. By the 2020s there is little clear difference in the magnitude of impact between population or emissions scenarios, but a large difference between different climate models: between 374 and 1661 million people are projected to experience an increase in water stress. By the 2050s there is still little difference between the emissions scenarios, but the different population assumptions have a clear effect. Under the A2 population between 1092 and 2761 million people have an increase in stress; under the B2 population the range is 6701538 million, respectively. The range in estimates is due to the slightly different patterns of change projected by the different climate models. Sensitivity analysis showed that a 10% variation in the population totals under a storyline could lead to variations in the numbers of people with an increase or decrease in stress of between 15% and 20%. The impact of these changes on actual water stresses will depend on how water resources are managed in the future. Keywords: Climate change impacts Global water resources Water resources stresses emissions scenarios Macro-scale hydrological model Multi-decadal variability Citedy By: 1079 The twentieth century was the wettest period in northern Pakistan over the past millennium Author: KS Treydte, GH Schleser,G Helle,DC Frank Journal: Nature,Vol.440( ),2006--Pages1179-1182 Abstract: Twentieth-century warming could lead to increases in the moisture-holding capacity of the atmosphere, altering the hydrological cycle and the characteristics of precipitation1. Such changes in the global rate and distribution of precipitation may have a greater direct effect on human well-being and ecosystem dynamics than changes in temperature itself2,3. Despite the co-variability of both of these climate variables3, attention in long-term climate reconstruction has mainly concentrated on temperature changes4,5,6,7,8. Here we present an annually resolved oxygen isotope record from tree-rings, providing a millennial-scale reconstruction of precipitation variability in the high mountains of northern Pakistan. The climatic signal originates mainly from winter precipitation, and is robust over ecologically different sites. Centennial-scale variations reveal dry conditions at the beginning of the past millennium and through the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, with precipitation increasing during the late nineteenth and the twentieth centuries to yield the wettest conditions of the past 1,000 years. Comparison with other long-term precipitation reconstructions indicates a large-scale intensification of the hydrological cycle coincident with the onset of industrialization and global warming, and the unprecedented amplitude argues for a human role. Keywords: Citedy By: 392 Sensitivity of malaria, schistosomiasis and dengue toglobal warming Author: WJM Martens,TH Jetten, DA Focks Journal: Climatic change,Vol.35(2),1997--Pages145-156 Abstract: Global assessment of the potential impacts of anthropogenically-induced climate change on vector-borne diseases suggests an increase in extent of the geographical areas susceptible to transmission of malarial Plasmodium parasites, dengue Flavivirus and Schistosoma worms. The transmission potential of the three associated vector-borne diseases studied is highly sensitive to climate changes on the periphery of the currently endemic areas and at higher altitudes within such areas. Our findings vis--vis the present endemic areas indicate that the increase in the epidemic potential of malaria and dengue transmission may be estimated at 1227% and 3147%, respectively, while in contrast, schistosomiasis transmission potential may be expected to exhibit a 1117% decrease. Keywords: Climate Change Malaria Geographical Area Global Warming High Altitude Citedy By: 294 Recent (19802009) evidence ofclimate changein the upper Karakoram,Pakistan Author: D Bocchiola,G Diolaiuti Journal: Theoretical and applied climatology,Vol.113(3),2013--Pages611-641 Abstract: We investigate here recent (19802009) climate variability in the upper Karakoram, Northern Pakistan, of particular interest given the peculiar glacier behavior during the last two decades. Differently from other glacierized regions in the Hindu KushKarakoramHimalaya region, glaciers in the Karakoram display limited ice thinning, and in some cases advancing has been detected. Climate analysis is required to describe recent (i.e., last three decades) variability, to aid highlighting of the factors driving glacier evolution. Starting from monthly data, we analyze seasonal values of total precipitation, number of wet days, maximum (max) and minimum (min) air temperature, max precipitation in 24h, and cloud cover for 17 weather stations in the upper Karakoram, clustered within three climatic regions as per use of principal components analysis. We detect possible nonstationarity in each of these regions by way of (1) linear regression, (2) moving window average, and (3) MannKendall test, also in progressive form, to detect the onset date of possible trends. We then evaluate linear correlation coefficients between Northern Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) index and climate variables to assess effectiveness of teleconnections, claimed recently to affect climate in this area. Also, we compare temperature within the investigated zone against global temperature anomalies, to evidence enhanced warming within this area. We found mostly nonsignificant changes of total precipitation, unless for few stations displaying increase in Chitral-Hindu Kush region and Northwest Karakoram, or Gilgit area, and decrease in Western Himalaya, Kotli region. Max precipitation is mostly unchanged, unless for slight increase in Chitral and Gilgit areas, and slight decrease in Kotli region. Number of wet days is mostly increasing in Gilgit area, and decreasing in Chitral area, with no clear signal in Kotli region. Min temperatures increase always but during Summer, when decreasing values are detected, especially for Gilgit and Chitral regions. Max temperatures are found to increase everywhere. Cloud cover is significantly increasing in Gilgit area, but decreasing otherwise, especially in Kotli region. Max temperature regime is significantly positively correlated against global thermal anomaly, while min temperature regime is nonsignificantly negatively correlated. Max and min temperatures seem mostly negatively correlated to NAO. Some dependence of trend intensity for the considered variables against altitude is found, different for each region, suggesting that investigation of weather variables at the highest altitudes is warranted to discriminate further climate variability in the area Keywords: Citedy By: 52 Adaptation toclimate changein the developing world Author: WN Adger,S Huq,K Brown Journal: Progress inDevelopment Studie,Vol.3(3),2003--Pages Abstract: The worlds climate is changing and will continue to change into the coming century at rates projected to be unprecedented in recent human history. The risks associated with these changes are real but highly uncertain. Societal vulnerability to the risks associated with climate change may exacerbate ongoing social and economic challenges, particularly for those parts of societies dependent on resources that are sensitive to changes in climate. Risks are apparent in agriculture, fisheries and many other components that constitute the livelihood of rural populations in developing countries. In this paper we explore the nature of risk and vulnerability in the context of climate change and review the evidence on present-day adaptation in developing countries and on coordinated international action on future adaptation. We argue that all societies are fundamentally adaptive and there are many situations in the past where societies have adapted to changes in climate and to similar risks. But some sectors are more sensitive and some groups in society more vulnerable to the risks posed by climate change than others. Yet all societies need to enhance their adaptive capacity to face both present and future climate change outside their experienced coping range. The challenges of climate change for development are in the present. Observed climate change, present-day climate variability and future expectations of change are changing the course of development strategies - development agencies and governments are now planning for this adaptation challenge. The primary challenge, therefore, posed at both the scale of local natural resource management and at the scale of international agreements and actions, is to promote adaptive capacity in the context of competing sustainable development objectives. Keywords: adaptation,climate change,environmental policy,uncertainty,vulnerability Citedy By: 1379 Heat stress increases long-term human migration in ruralPakistan Author: V Mueller,C Gray,K Kosec Journal: Natureclimate change,Vol.4(2),2014--Pages Abstract: Human migration attributable to climate events has recently received significant attention from the academic and policy communities1,2. Quantitative evidence on the relationship between individual, permanent migration and natural disasters is limited3,4,5,6,7,8,9. A 21-year longitudinal survey conducted in rural Pakistan (19912012) provides a unique opportunity to understand the relationship between weather and long-term migration. We link individual-level information from this survey to satellite-derived measures of climate variability and control for potential confounders using a multivariate approach. We find that floodinga climate shock associated with large relief effortshas modest to insignificant impacts on migration. Heat stress, howeverwhich has attracted relatively little reliefconsistently increases the long-term migration of men, driven by a negative effect on farm and non-farm income. Addressing weather-related displacement will require policies that both enhance resilience to climate shocks and lower barriers to welfare-enhancing population movements. Keywords: Citedy By: 103 GIS-based high-resolution spatial interpolation of precipitation in mountainplain areas of Upper Pakistanfor regionalclimate changeimpact studies Author: MW Ashiq, C Zhao, J Ni, M Akhtar Journal: Theoretical and Applied Climatology,Vol.131(319),2010--Pages Abstract: In this study, the baseline period (19601990) precipitation simulation of regional climate model PRECIS is evaluated and downscaled on a monthly basis for northwestern Himalayan mountains and upper Indus plains of Pakistan. Different interpolation models in GIS environment are used to generate fine scale (250??250m2) precipitation surfaces from PRECIS precipitation data. Results show that the multivariate extension model of ordinary kriging that uses elevation as secondary data is the best model especially for monsoon months. Model results are further compared with observations from 25 meteorological stations in the study area. Modeled data show overall good correlation with observations confirming the ability of PRECIS to capture major precipitation features in the region. Results for low and erratic precipitation months, September and October, are however showing poor correlation with observations. During monsoon months (June, July, August) precipitation pattern is different from the rest of the months. It increases from south to north, but during monsoon maximum precipitation is in the southern regions of the Himalayas, and extreme northern areas receive very less precipitation. Modeled precipitation toward the end of the twenty-first century under A2 and B2 scenarios show overall decrease during winter and increase in spring and monsoon in the study area. Spatially, both scenarios show similar pattern but with varying magnitude. In monsoon, the Himalayan southern regions will have more precipitation, whereas northern areas and southern plains will face decrease in precipitation. Western and south western areas will suffer from less precipitation throughout the year except peak monsoon months.Ttest results also show that changes in monthly precipitation over the study area are significant except for July, August, and December. Result of this study provide reliable basis for further climate change impact studies on various resources. Keywords: Root Mean Square ErrorRegional Climate ModelBaseline PeriodOrdinary KrigingCokriging Citedy By: 60 Climate change: can wheat beat the heat? Author: R Ortiz, KD Sayre, B Govaerts, R Gupta Journal: Agriculture, Ecosystems,Vol.126(2),2008--Pages46-58 Abstract: Climate change could strongly affect the wheat crop that accounts for 21% of food and 200 million hectares of farmland worldwide. This article reviews some of the approaches for addressing the expected effects that climate change may likely inflict on wheat in some of the most important wheat growing areas, namely germplasm adaptation, system management, and mitigation. Future climate scenarios suggest that global warming may be beneficial for the wheat crop in some regions, but could reduce productivity in zones where optimal temperatures already exist. For example, by 2050, as a result of possible climate shifts in the Indo-Gangetic Plains (IGPs) currently part of the favorable, high potential, irrigated, low rainfall mega-environment, which accounts for 15% of global wheat production as much as 51% of its area might be reclassified as a heat-stressed, irrigated, short-season production mega-environment. This shift would also represent a significant reduction in wheat yields, unless appropriate cultivars and crop management practices were offered to and adopted by South Asian farmers. Under the same climate scenarios, the area covered by the cool, temperate wheat mega-environment could expand as far as 65N in both North America and Eurasia. To adapt and mitigate the climate change effects on wheat supplies for the poor, germplasm scientists and agronomists are developing heat-tolerant wheat germplasm, as well as cultivars better adapted to conservation agriculture. Encouraging results include identifying sources of alleles for heat tolerance and their introgression into breeding populations through conventional methods and biotechnology. Likewise, agronomists and extension agents are aiming to cut CO2emissions by reducing tillage and the burning of crop residues. Mitigation research promises to reduce emissions of nitrous oxide by using infrared sensors and the normalized differential vegetative index (NDVI) that determines the right times and correct amounts of fertilizer to apply. Wheat geneticists and physiologists are also assessing wild relatives of wheat as potential sources of genes with inhibitory effects on soil nitrification. Through the existing global and regional research-for-development networks featuring wheat, technology and knowledge can flow to allow farmers to face the risks associated with climate change. Keywords: Triticum aestivum Climate change Conservation agriculture Genetic enhancement Mega-environment Wheat Citedy By: 428 The impact ofclimate changeon the water resources of HindukushKarakorumHimalaya region under different glacier coverage scenarios Author: M Akhtar,N Ahmad,MJ Booij Journal: Journal of hydrology,Vol.355(1-4),2008--Pages148-163 Abstract: This paper presents estimates of water resources changes in three river basins in the HindukushKarakorumHimalaya (HKH) region associated with climate change. The present climate (19611990) and future climate SRES A2 scenario (20712100) are simulated by the PRECIS Regional Climate Model at a spatial resolution of 2525km. Two HBV models (i.e. HBV-Met and HBV-PRECIS) are designed to quantify the future discharge. HBV-Met is calibrated and validated with inputs from observed meteorological data while HBV-PRECIS is calibrated and validated with inputs from PRECIS RCM simulations for the current climate. The future precipitation and temperature series are constructed through the delta change approach in HBV-Met, while in HBV-PRECIS future precipitation and temperature series from PRECIS RCM are directly used. The future discharge is simulated for three stages of glacier coverage: 100% glaciers, 50% glaciers and 0% glaciers. Generally temperature and precipitation shows an increase towards the end of 21st century. The efficiencies of HBV-Met during calibration and validation are higher compared to the HBV-PRECIS efficiencies. In a changed climate, discharge will generally increase in both models for 100% and 50% glacier scenarios. For the 0% glacier scenario, HBV-Met predicts a drastic decrease in water resources (up to 94%) in contrast to HBV-PRECIS which shows only a decrease up to 15%. Huge outliers in annual maximum discharge simulated through HBV-Met indicate that hydrological conditions are not predicted perfectly through the delta change downscaling approach. The results for HBV-Met simply confirm that the quality of observed data in this region is poor. The HBV-PRECIS model results are indicative of the higher risk of flood problems under climate change. The climate change signals in all three river basins are similar however, there are differences in the evaluated future water resources estimated through HBV-Met, whereas in HBV-PRECIS the changes in water resources are similar. This shows that the transfer of climate change signals into hydrological changes is more consistent in HBV-PRECIS than in HBV-Met. One of the reasons of the poorer results of the delta change approach is that in this approach the frequency of rainy days is not changed and day to day variability in temperature is not correctly transferred. However more research is needed to evaluate the uncertainties in both downscaling approaches. Moreover, the dynamical downscaling approach needs to be tested with other RCMs and preferably to other river basins as well. Keywords: Citedy By: 318 Climate changeat the 4.2 ka BP termination of the Indus valley civilization and Holocene south Asian monsoon variability Author: M Staubwasser, F Sirocko Journal: Geophysical ResearchLetters,Vol.30(8),2003--Pages Abstract: Planktonic oxygen isotope ratios off the Indus delta reveal climate changes with a multi-centennial pacing during the last 6 ka, with the most prominent change recorded at 4.2 ka BP. Opposing isotopic trends across the northern Arabian Sea surface at that time indicate a reduction in Indus river discharge and suggest that later cycles also reflect variations in total annual rainfall over south Asia. The 4.2 ka event is coherent with the termination of urban Harappan civilization in the Indus valley. Thus, drought may have initiated southeastward habitat tracking within the Harappan cultural domain. The late Holocene drought cycles following the 4.2 ka BP event vary between 200 and 800 years and are coherent with the evolution of cosmogenic14C production rates. This suggests that solar variability is one fundamental cause behind Holocene rainfall changes over south Asia. Keywords: Citedy By: 339 Doesglobal warmingcause intensified interannual hydroclimate variability? Author: R Seager,N Naik, L Vogel Journal: Journal of Climate,Vol.25(9),2012--Pages3355-3372 Abstract: The idea that global warming leads to more droughts and floods has become commonplace without clear indication of what is meant by this statement. Here, the authors examine one aspect of this problem and assess whether interannual variability of precipitation P minus evaporation E becomes stronger in the twenty-first century compared to the twentieth century, as deduced from an ensemble of models participating in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 3. It is shown that indeed interannual variability of P ? E does increase almost everywhere across the planet, with a few notable exceptions such as southwestern North America and some subtropical regions. The variability increases most at the equator and the high latitudes and least in the subtropics. Although most interannual P ? E variability arises from internal atmosphere variability, the primary potentially predictable component is related to the El NioSouthern Oscillation (ENSO). ENSO-driven interannual P ? E variability clearly increases in amplitude in the tropical Pacific, but elsewhere the changes are more complex. This is not surprising in that ENSO-driven P ? E anomalies are primarily caused by circulation anomalies combining with the climatological humidity field. As climate warms and the specific humidity increases, this term leads to an intensification of ENSO-driven P ? E variability. However, ENSO-driven circulation anomalies also change, in some regions amplifying but in others opposing and even overwhelming the impact of rising specific humidity. Consequently, there is sound scientific basis for anticipating a general increase in interannual P ? E variability, but the predictable component will depend in a more complex way on both thermodynamic responses to global warming and on how tropically forced circulation anomalies alter. Keywords: Climate change;Climate variability;Hydrologic cycle Citedy By: 88 Organic carbon exhumation andglobal warmingduring the early Himalayan collision Author: Richard A. BeckDouglas W. BurbankWilliam J. SercombeThomas L. OlsonAsrar M. Khan Journal: Geology,Vol.23(5),1995--Pages387-390 Abstract: Organic carbon eroded and oxidized from marine sediments on the passive and active neo-Tethyan margins during the early Indian-Asian collision may have been sufficient to shift the carbon isotopic ratios of late Paleoceneearly Eocene marine carbonates toward lighter values, and may have contributed to coeval global warming via the greenhouse effect. New limits on the timing of collision and the organic carbon content of Himalayan sedimentary sources and sinks allow us to estimate the net Paleogene flux. Our calculations suggest that continental collisions play a fundamental role in the global carbon cycle and climate through the exhumation as well as burial of organic carbon. Keywords: Citedy By: 46 The impact of municipal solid waste treatment methodson greenhouse gas emissions in Lahore,Pakistan Author: SA Batool, MN Chuadhry Journal: Waste management,Vol.29(1),2009--Pages63-69 Abstract: The contribution of existing municipal solid waste management to emission of greenhouse gases and the alternative scenarios to reduce emissions were analyzed for Data Ganj Bukhsh Town (DGBT) in Lahore, Pakistan using the life cycle assessment methodology. DGBT has a population of 1,624,169 people living in 232,024 dwellings. Total waste generated is 500,000 tons per year with an average per capita rate of 0.84 kg per day. Alternative scenarios were developed and evaluated according to the environmental, economic, and social atmosphere of the study area. Solid waste management options considered include the collection and transportation of waste, collection of recyclables with single and mixed material bank container systems (SMBCS, MMBCS), material recovery facilities (MRF), composting, biogasification and landfilling. A life cycle inventory (LCI) of the six scenarios along with the baseline scenario was completed; this helped to quantify the CO2equivalents, emitted and avoided, for energy consumption, production, fuel consumption, and methane (CH4) emissions. LCI results showed that the contribution of the baseline scenario to the global warming potential as CO2 equivalents was a maximum of 838,116 tons. The sixth scenario had a maximum reduction of GHG emissions in terms of CO2 equivalents of 33,773 tons, but the most workable scenario for the current situation in the study area is scenario 5. It saves 25% in CO2equivalents compared to the baseline scenario. Keywords: Citedy By: 76 Impact ofclimate changeon wheat production: A case study ofPakistan[with Comments] Author: PZ Janjua,G Samad, NU Khan,M Nasir Journal: The Pakistan Development Review,Vol.49(4),2010--Pages Abstract: Climate change, due to greenhouse gases increasing the earth's overall temperature, is an emerging issue of agricultural production. The higher temperatures may negatively affect the growth process of wheat and decrease the production of wheat. The objective of this study is to look at the impact of climate change on wheat production which is the main food crop of Pakistan. The study uses the Vector Auto Regression (VAR) model to evaluate the impact of global climate change on the production of wheat in Pakistan. The study considers annual data from 1960 to 2009. On the basis of this historical data, the study captures trends for the impact of climate change on wheat production for the period 2010-2060. The results of the historical data estimation reveal that up until now, there is no significant negative impact of climate change on wheat production in Pakistan. However, future wheat production will significantly depend on the climate change variables. Therefore, appropriate adaptative and mitigative techniques are recommended to cope with or at least to reduce this newly emerging hazard. Keywords: Citedy By: 29 Prospects of solar water heating for textile industry inPakistan Author: T Muneer, S Maubleu,M Asif Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy ,Vol.10(1),2006--Pages1-23 Abstract: Energy is the prime source of human activities in all sectors of life. Traditionally fossil fuel has been the prime source of energy. However, there are two major concerns regarding fossil fuels, i.e. their rapid depletion and their contribution towards growing global warming. It is being widely realized that for sustainable development presently used energy mediums such as fossil fuel and nuclear power have to be quickly replaced by renewable energy sources. The latter are sustainable and have the potential to meet present and future projected global energy demands without inflicting any environmental impacts. Pakistan is amongst the most prominent cotton producing countries in the world. The affluent availability of local cotton has lead to a well-established textile sector in Pakistan. A large proportion of its cotton products go into export. Being a successful candidate in international textile market Pakistani textile industry is continuously seeking modern and high-tech facilities to improve quality of its products. The biggest challenge Pakistani textile industry is facing today is how to cut down its environmental burdens to cope with the international standards on the issue. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Globalwater crisis and future food security in an era ofclimate change Author: MA Hanjra,ME Qureshi Journal: Food Policy,Vol.35(5),2010--Pages365-377 Abstract: Food policy should serve humanity by advancing the humane goals of eradicating extreme poverty and hunger. However, these goals have recently been challenged by emerging forces including climate change, water scarcity, the energy crisis as well as the credit crisis. This paper analyses the overall role of these forces and population growth in redefining global food security. Specifically, global water supply and demand as well as the linkages between water supply and food security are examined. The analysis reveals that the water for food security situation is intricate and might get daunting if no action is taken. Investments are needed today for enhancing future food security; this requires action on several fronts, including tackling climate change, preserving land and conserving water, reducing the energy footprint in food systems, developing and adopting climate resilient varieties, modernising irrigation infrastructure, shoring up domestic food supplies, reforming international food trade, and responding to other global challenges. Keywords: Climate resilient Energy crisis Credit crisis Irrigation Food trade Prices Citedy By: 494 Interdecadal oscillations and thewarmingtrend in the area-weighted annual mean temperature of Pakistan Author: M Afzaal, MA Haroon, Q ul Zaman Journal: PakistanJournal ofMetrology,Vol.6(11),2009--Pages Abstract: The assessment of change in temperature of the country is very much essential in the global warming context. The availibity of accurate and reliable long term temperature records becomes imperative for the purpose mentioned above. In the partial fulfillment of the need the area-weighted annual temperature time series for Pakistan is prepared for the period 1901 2007, by merging the Climate Research Unit (CRU) and Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD) observed datasets. For this purpose, some statistical analysis has been done on both the datasets to evaluate the agreement between the two datasets. The datasets were found to have correlation of 0.86 for the period 1960 2000, besides other similarities of variance, mean, standard deviation etc. After the reconstruction of long term temperature time series spectral analysis has been carried out to identify the variations over the time span in terms of frequency. This analysis revealed that there are inter decadal oscillations of the period of 14 50 years and inter annual oscillations of the period 5 6 years in the time series. Linear trend analysis showed that there is a clear indication of warming in Pakistan. The increasing rate of temperature has been found to be 0.06C per decade. Total change in temperature is calculated to be 0.64C, with warming and cooling episodes in last 127 years. Keywords: Citedy By: 23 Sustainable development inPakistanin the context of energy consumption demand and environmental degradation Author: S Alam,A Fatima, MS Butt Journal: Journal of Asian Economics,Vol.18(5),2007--Pages825-837 Abstract: The aim of this paper is to analyze the impact of population growth, economic growth, energy intensity (EI) growth and urbanization growth on environmental degradation in Pakistan. The paper will investigate simultaneously the effect of population growth, urbanization, energy consumption and environmental degradation on the sustainable economic growth as well. To ensure the sustainable development of the economy environmental degradation should not increase with time but be reduced or at least remain constant. If it increases, we will move further away for sustainability, while if it decreases, we will move closer towards it. The results indicate that 1% increase in GDP growth leads to 0.84% increase in growth rate of carbon dioxide emissions, and an increase of 1% in the energy intensity growth rate causes almost 0.24% increases in growth rate of CO2emissions. As far as results of co-integrating vector normalized on GDP growth is concerned, the coefficients of EI growth and CO2emissions growth are found to be affecting the level of development significantly and positively by 0.3% and 1.2%, respectively. This indicates that in Pakistan process of economic development is dependent on the level of energy use and the resultant of this energy use, CO2emissions caused economic growth significantly and positively. In addition to the rapid urbanization and increased population growth affect positively to environmental degradation while negatively and significantly to the economic development in the long run. Keywords: Economic growth Environmental degradation CO2emission Energy intensity Urbanization Citedy By: 94 Climate changeand the South Asian summer monsoon Author: AG Turner, H Annamalai Journal: Nature Climate Change ,Vol.2(),2012--Pages587-595 Abstract: The vagaries of South Asian summer monsoon rainfall on short and long timescales impact the lives of more than one billion people. Understanding how the monsoon will change in the face of global warming is a challenge for climate science, not least because our state-of-the-art general circulation models still have difficulty simulating the regional distribution of monsoon rainfall. However, we are beginning to understand more about processes driving the monsoon, its seasonal cycle and modes of variability. This gives us the hope that we can build better models and ultimately reduce the uncertainty in our projections of future monsoon rainfall. Keywords: Citedy By: 344 Mapping vulnerability toclimate changeand its repercussions on human health inPakistan Author: SM Malik, H Awan, N Khan Journal: Global Health. ,Vol.8(31),2012--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is highly vulnerable to climate change due to its geographic location, high dependence on agriculture and water resources, low adaptive capacity of its people, and weak system of emergency preparedness. This paper is the first ever attempt to rank the agro-ecological zones in Pakistan according to their vulnerability to climate change and to identify the potential health repercussions of each manifestation of climate change in the context of Pakistan.MethodsA climate change vulnerability index is constructed as an un-weighted average of three sub-indices measuring (a) the ecological exposure of each region to climate change, (b) sensitivity of the population to climate change and (c) the adaptive capacity of the population inhabiting a particular region. The regions are ranked according to the value of this index and its components. Since health is one of the most important dimensions of human wellbeing, this paper also identifies the potential health repercussions of each manifestations of climate change and links it with the key manifestations of climate change in the context of Pakistan. The results indicate that Balochistan is the most vulnerable region with high sensitivity and low adaptive capacity followed by low-intensity Punjab (mostly consisting of South Punjab) and Cotton/Wheat Sindh. The health risks that each of these regions face depend upon the type of threat that they face from climate change. Greater incidence of flooding, which may occur due to climate variability, poses the risk of diarrhoea and gastroenteritis; skin and eye Infections; acute respiratory infections; and malaria. Exposure to drought poses the potential health risks in the form of food insecurity and malnutrition; anaemia; night blindness; and scurvy. Increases in temperature pose health risks of heat stroke; malaria; dengue; respiratory diseases; and cardiovascular diseases. The study concludes that geographical zones that are more exposed to climate change in ecological and geographic terms- such as Balochistan, Low-Intensity Punjab, and Cotton-Wheat Sindh -also happen to be the most deprived regions in Pakistan in terms of socio-economic indicators, suggesting that the government needs to direct its efforts to the socio-economic uplift of these lagging regions to reduce their vulnerability to the adverse effects of climate change. Keywords: Pakistan, Climate change, Vulnerability, Health. Citedy By: 26 The melting Himalayas: cascading effects ofclimate changeon water, biodiversity, and livelihoods Author: J Xu,RE Grumbine, A Shrestha, M Eriksson Journal: Conservation,Vol.23(3),2009--Pages520-530 Abstract: The Greater Himalayas hold the largest mass of ice outside polar regions and are the source of the 10 largest rivers in Asia. Rapid reduction in the volume of Himalayan glaciers due to climate change is occurring. The cascading effects of rising temperatures and loss of ice and snow in the region are affecting, for example, water availability (amounts, seasonality), biodiversity (endemic species, predatorprey relations), ecosystem boundary shifts (tree-line movements, high-elevation ecosystem changes), and global feedbacks (monsoonal shifts, loss of soil carbon). Climate change will also have environmental and social impacts that will likely increase uncertainty in water supplies and agricultural production for human populations across Asia. A common understanding of climate change needs to be developed through regional and local-scale research so that mitigation and adaptation strategies can be identified and implemented. The challenges brought about by climate change in the Greater Himalayas can only be addressed through increased regional collaboration in scientific research and policy making. Keywords: Citedy By: 436 Interdecadal oscillations and thewarmingtrend in the area-weighted annual mean temperature ofPakistan Author: M Afzaal, MA Haroon, Qul Zaman Journal: PakistanJournal ofMeteorology ,Vol.6(11),2009--Pages Abstract: The assessment of change in temperature of the country is very much essential in the global warming context. The availability of accurate and reliable long term temperature records becomes imperative for the purpose mentioned above. In the partial fulfillment of the need the area-weighted annual temperature time series for Pakistan is prepared for the period 1901 2007, by merging the Climate Research Unit (CRU) and Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD) observed datasets. For this purpose, some statistical analysis has been done on both the datasets to evaluate the agreement between the two datasets. The datasets were found to have correlation of 0.86 for the period 1960 2000, besides other similarities of variance, mean, standard deviation etc. After the reconstruction of long term temperature time series spectral analysis has been carried out to identify the variations over the time span in terms of frequency. This analysis revealed that there are inter decadal oscillations of the period of 14 50 years and inter annual oscillations of the period 5 6 years in the time series. Linear trend analysis showed that there is a clear indication of warming in Pakistan. The increasing rate of temperature has been found to be 0.06C per decade. Total change in temperature is calculated to be 0.64C, with warming and cooling episodes in last 127 years Keywords: Citedy By: 23 Precipitation trends over time using Mann-Kendall and spearman's rho tests in swat river basin, Pakistan Author: I Ahmad, D Tang, TF Wang, M Wang Journal: Advances in Meteorology,Vol.(),2015--Pages1-15 Abstract: Accurately predicting precipitation trends is vital in the economic development of a country. This research investigated precipitation variability across 15 stations in the Swat River basin, Pakistan, over a 51-year study period (19612011). Nonparametric Mann-Kendall (MK) and Spearmans rho (SR) statistical tests were used to detect trends in monthly, seasonal, and annual precipitation, and the trend-free prewhitening approach was applied to eliminate serial correlation in the precipitation time series. The results highlighted a mix of positive (increasing) and negative (decreasing) trends in monthly, seasonal, and annual precipitation. One station in particular, the Saidu Sharif station, showed the maximum number of significant monthly precipitation events, followed by Abazai, Khairabad, and Malakand. On the seasonal time scale, precipitation trends changed from the summer to the autumn season. The Saidu Sharif station revealed the highest positive trend (7.48?mm/year) in annual precipitation. In the entire Swat River basin, statistically insignificant trends were found in the subbasins for the annual precipitation series; however, the Lower Swat subbasin showed the maximum quantitative increase in the precipitation at a rate of 2.18?mm/year. The performance of the MK and SR tests was consistent at the verified significance level. Keywords: Citedy By: 47 Biomass fuel burning and its implications: deforestation and greenhouse gases emissions in Pakistan Author: SNA Tahir, M Rafique,AS Alaamer Journal: Environmental Pollution,Vol.158(7),2010--Pages2490-2495 Abstract: Pakistan is facing problem of deforestation. Pakistan lost 14.7% of its forest habitat between 1990 and 2005 interval. This paper assesses the present forest wood consumption rate by 6000 brick kilns established in the country and its implications in terms of deforestation and emission of greenhouse gases. Information regarding consumption of forest wood by the brick kilns was collected during a manual survey of 180 brick kiln units conducted in eighteen provincial divisions of country. Considering annual emission contributions of three primary GHGs i.e., CO2, CH4 and N2O, due to burning of forest wood in brick kiln units in Pakistan and using IPCC recommended GWP indices, the combined CO2-equivalent has been estimated to be 533019 t y?1. Keywords: Deforestation, Biomass burning, Brick kilns, Greenhouse gas emission Citedy By: 32 Climate changein Asia: a review of the vulnerability and adaptation of crop production Author: A Iglesias, L Erda, C Rosenzweig Journal: Climate Change Vulnerability and Adaptation in Asia and the Pacific,Vol.(),1996--Pages13-27 Abstract: A number of studies have provided quantitative assessments of the potential climate change impacts on crop production in Asia. Estimates take into account (a) uncertainty in the level of climate change expected, using a range of climate change scenarios; (b) physiological effects of carbon dioxide on the crops; and (c) different adaptive responses. In all cases, the effects of climate change induced by increased atmospheric carbon dioxide depended on the counteracting effects among higher daily evapo-transpiration rates, shortening of crop growth duration, and changes in precipitation patterns, as well as the effects of carbon dioxide on crop growth and water-use efficiency. Although results varied depending on the geographical locations of the regions tested, the production of rice (the main food crop in the region) generally did not benefit from climate change. In South and Southeast Asia, there is concern about how climate change may affect El Nino/Southern Oscillation events, since these play a key role in determining agricultural production. Furthermore, problems arising from variability of water availability and soil degradation are currently major challenges to agriculture in the region. These problems may be exacerbated in the future if global climate change projections are realized. Many studies have considered strategies for improving agricultural management, based on the optimization of crop management decisions. Climate change analyses could be further strengthened by economic studies that integrate the potential use of natural resources across sectors. Keywords: AsiaagricultureEl Nio Citedy By: 63 Evaluation of SDSM developed by annual and monthly sub-models for downscaling temperature and precipitation in the Jhelum basin,Pakistanand India Author: R Mahmood, MS Babel Journal: Theoretical and Applied Climatology,Vol.113(1-2),2013--Pages27-44 Abstract: The study evaluates statistical downscaling model (SDSM) developed by annual and monthly sub-models for downscaling maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and precipitation, and assesses future changes in climate in the Jhelum River basin, Pakistan and India. Additionally, bias correction is applied on downscaled climate variables. The mean explained variances of 66, 76, and 11% for max temperature, min temperature, and precipitation, respectively, are obtained during calibration of SDSM with NCEP predictors, which are selected through a quantitative procedure. During validation, averageR2values by the annual sub-model (SDSM-A)followed by bias correction using NCEP, H3A2, and H3B2lie between 98.4 and 99.1% for both max and min temperature, and 77 to 85% for precipitation. As for the monthly sub-model (SDSM-M), followed by bias correction, averageR2values lie between 98.5 and 99.5% for both max and min temperature and 75 to 83% for precipitation. These results indicate a good applicability of SDSM-A and SDSM-M for downscaling max temperature, min temperature, and precipitation under H3A2 and H3B2 scenarios for future periods of the 2020s, 2050s, and 2080s in this basin. Both sub-models show a mean annual increase in max temperature, min temperature, and precipitation. Under H3A2, and according to both sub-models, changes in max temperature, min temperature, and precipitation are projected as 0.913.15C, 0.932.63C, and 612%, and under H3B2, the values of change are 0.691.92C, 0.561.63C, and 814% in 2020s, 2050s, and 2080s. These results show that the climate of the basin will be warmer and wetter relative to the baseline period. SDSM-A, most of the time, projects higher changes in climate than SDSM-M. It can also be concluded that although SDSM-A performed well in predicting mean annual values, it cannot be used with regard to monthly and seasonal variations, especially in the case of precipitation unless correction is applied. Keywords: Root Mean Square Error,Regional Climate Model,Bias Correction, Future PeriodStatistical Downscaling Citedy By: 65 Rise in summer heat index overPakistan Author: M Zahid, G Rasul Journal: PakistanJournal of Meteorology,Vol.6(12),2010--Pages Abstract: Heat index is a serious threat to health in Southern Punjab, almost all parts of Sindh, South eastern Baluchistan extending upto coast and plains of North Eastern Baluchistan of Pakistan particularly during summer. The temperature is rising due to anthropogenic activities resulting in global warming. Summer season has prolonged while winters have become short in Pakistan. Summers have become hotter and thus affecting the lives of the people engaged in outdoor activities during scorching sun hours. The rise in heat index has been calculated from 1961 to 2007 during summer (May- September) in different regions of the country. The aim of this paper is to identify the spots most vulnerable to heat strokes, heat waves and sun burns due to high heat index. The results show rising trend of heat index in almost all the regions of Pakistan. The highest increase in heat index value has been observed in areas of Azad Jammu & Kashmir. The second highest increase is observed in Punjab and Sindh regions where thermal regime is already a challenge to human tolerance. Even Northern Areas, Baluchistan and NWFP have also shown rising trend of heat index. The summer season analysis for the entire Pakistan has also done combining all the regions of the country to calculate the total change in heat index over the time scale of 47 years. . The average increase in apparent air temperature in Pakistan is 3C. (276.15K). Pakistan experiences a clear shift in heat index pattern from its southern half towards northern half. Keywords: Citedy By: 24 Curbingglobal warmingwith phase change materials for energy storage Author: MR Anisur,MH Mahfuz,MA Kibria,R Saidur Journal: Renewable andand Sustainable Energy Reviews ,Vol.18(),2013--Pages23-30 Abstract: The application of thermal energy storage (TES) system with phase change material (PCM) is an effective way for energy conservation and greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction. Global warming is increasing along with the energy consumption. Many researchers are concerned about this present global environmental problem for fossil-fuel burning. Thermal energy storage system with phase change material is observed as a potential candidate for mitigating this problem. This paper emphasizes the opportunities for energy savings and greenhouse-gas emissions reduction with the implementation of PCM in TES systems. For instance, about 3.43% of CO2emission by 2020 could be reduced through the application of PCM in building and solar thermal power systems. Similarly, energy conservation and GHGs emission reduction by other PCM applications for thermal comfort of vehicles, transport refrigeration, engine cold start, greenhouse and waste heat management are also presented. In addition, some present investigations on the performance improvement of the phase change materials are addressed. Keywords: Thermal energy storage, Phase change material Fossil fuel consumption Energy saving Greenhouse gas emission Citedy By: 65 Herders' perceptions of and responses to climate changein northern Pakistan Author: S Joshi, WA Jasra, M Ismail, RM Shrestha Journal: Environmental Management ,Vol.52(3),2013--Pages639-648 Abstract: Migratory pastoralism is an adaptation to a harsh and unstable environment, and pastoral herders have traditionally adapted to environmental and climatic change by building on their in-depth knowledge of this environment. In the Hindu Kush Himalayan region, and particularly in the arid and semiarid areas of northern Pakistan, pastoralism, the main livelihood, is vulnerable to climate change. Little detailed information is available about climate trends and impacts in remote mountain regions; herders perceptions of climate change can provide the information needed by policy makers to address problems and make decisions on adaptive strategies in high pastoral areas. A survey was conducted in GilgitBaltistan province of Pakistan to assess herders perceptions of, and adaptation strategies to climate change. Herders perceptions were gathered in individual interviews and focus group discussions. The herders perceived a change in climate over the past 1015years with longer and more intense droughts in summer, more frequent and heavier snowfall in winter, and prolonged summers and relatively shorter winters. These perceptions were validated by published scientific evidence. The herders considered that the change in climate had directly impacted pastures and then livestock by changing vegetation composition and reducing forage yield. They had adopted some adaptive strategies in response to the change such as altering the migration pattern and diversifying livelihoods. The findings show that the herder communities have practical lessons and indigenous knowledge related to rangeland management and adaptation to climate change that should be shared with the scientific community and integrated into development planning. Keywords: AdaptationClimate changeHerdersHindu Kush Himalayan regionPerceptionRangeland Citedy By: 18 Timing and style of Late Quaternary glaciation in the eastern Hindu Kush, Chitral, northernPakistan: a review and revision of the glacial chronology Author: LA Owen,U Kamp,JQ Spencer, K Haserodt Journal: Quaternary International,Vol.97-98(),2002--Pages41-55 Abstract: Glacial landforms and sediments provide evidence for two Late Quaternary major glaciations in the eastern Hindu Kush. New optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating was undertaken to define the timing of these glaciations and associated sediment deposition. The Drosh Glacial, was defined by OSL dating to have occurred during marine isotopic stage-3, producing an extensive valley glaciation that extended to an altitude of ?1300m above sea level (asl) in the main valley, with an equilibrium line altitude (ELA) depression of ?1200m. The Pret Glacial produced a valley glaciation that extended to an altitude of ?1670m asl. in the main valley, with an ELA depression of ?1000m. The new OSL dating suggests that this glacial stage probably represents several glacial advances that occurred during the latter part of the Last Glacial. Moraines representing two minor glacial advances, the Shandur and Barum Glacial stages, were also recognized near the contemporary glaciers. These probably formed during the Middle/Late Holocene and Little Ice Age, respectively. This study and comparisons with adjacent regions suggest that there was limited glaciation during the global Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) in the Hindu Kush. Deglaciation in the mountain ranges of the Himalayas and the consequent meltwater discharge into the adjacent seas was negligible immediately after the global LGM and it was therefore of minor importance as a forcing factor for global climate change during the end of the last glacial cycle. However, our studies show that glaciation and particularly deglaciation is important in controlling the deposition of thick valley fills and the landscape evolution of the high mountain environments. Keywords: Citedy By: 120 Fluctuations of Raikot Glacier during the past 70 years: a case study from the Nanga Parbat massif, northernPakistan Author: S Schmidt,M Nsser Journal: Journal of Glaciology,Vol.55(194),2009--Pages949-959 Abstract: The Himalaya has some of the largest glacier concentrations outside the polar regions. Despite this, long-term measurements detecting the impact of global warming and changing precipitation patterns on glaciers are rare. The Nanga Parbat massif in northern Pakistan is an exception. The cartographer and glaciologist R. Finsterwalder investigated glacier dynamics of this mountain massif in the 1930s, and several other studies document changes since then. The aim of this study is to detect and analyse the changes of Raikot Glacier over the past seven decades. We use a multitemporal and multiscale approach, based on repeat terrestrial images, additional historical data and remotely sensed imagery (Corona, ASTER, Landsat, QuickBird). The multitemporal approach covers the period 19342007. While the analyses show a total glacier retreat of ~200 m in 73 years, this general trend was interrupted by a significant glacier advance between the 1950s and 1980s. Although down-wasting processes can be inferred from an increase in debris-covered area, a general trend of reduced glacier thickness does not appear significant over the whole observation period Keywords: Citedy By: 55 The Karakoram anomaly? Glacier expansion and the 'elevation effect,'Karakoram Himalaya Author: K Hewitt Journal: Mountain Research and Development,Vol.25(4),2005--Pages332-340 Abstract: In the late 1990s widespread evidence of glacier expansion was found in the central Karakoram, in contrast to a worldwide decline of mountain glaciers. The expansions were almost exclusively in glacier basins from the highest parts of the range and developed quickly after decades of decline. Exceptional numbers of glacier surges were also reported. Unfortunately, there has been no on-going measurement of climatic or glaciological variables at these elevations. The present article examines possible explanations for this seemingly anomalous behavior, using evidence from short-term monitoring programs, low-altitude weather stations, and the distinctive environmental characteristics of the region. The latter involve interactions between regional air mass climatology, its seasonality, topoclimate or verticality effects on glaciers with extreme altitudinal range, climatic sensitivities of heavy versus thin supraglacial debris, and complex temperature distributions in ice masses with ice falls throughout critical elevations. Valley climate stations indicate increases in precipitation over the past 50 years and small declines in summer temperatures, which may indicate positive trends in glacier mass balance. However, the suddenness of the expansions is problematic, as is their confinement to glaciers from the highest watersheds while others continue to retreat. Thermal shifts in ice masses with extreme altitude ranges may be even more critical, leading to an accelerated redistribution of ice mass by elevation. Keywords: Citedy By: 411 Snow cover dynamics and hydrological regime of the Hunza River basin, Karakoram Range, Northern Pakistan Author: P Chevallier, Y Arnaud Journal: Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, European Geosciences Union, ,Vol.15(7),2011--Pages2259-2274 Abstract: A major proportion of flow in the Indus River is contributed by its snow- and glacier-fed river catchments situated in the Himalaya, Karakoram and Hindukush ranges. It is therefore essential to understand the cryosphere dynamics in this area for water resource management. The MODIS MOD10A2 remote-sensing database of snow cover products from March 2000 to December 2009 was selected to analyse the snow cover changes in the Hunza River basin (the snow- and glacier-fed sub-catchment of the Indus River). A database of daily flows for the Hunza River at Dainyor Bridge over a period of 40 yr and climate data (precipitation and temperature) for 10 yr from three meteorological stations within the catchment was made available to investigate the hydrological regime in the area. Analysis of remotely sensed cryosphere (snow and ice cover) data during the last decade (2000-2009) suggest a rather slight expansion of cryosphere in the area in contrast to most of the regions in the world where glaciers are melting rapidly. This increase in snow cover may be the result of an increase in winter precipitation caused by westerly circulation. The impact of global warming is not effective because a large part of the basin area lies under high altitudes where the temperature remains negative throughout most of the year. Keywords: Citedy By: 85 Projections of crop water requirement in Pakistanunder global warming Author: G Naheed, G Rasul Journal: Journal of Meteorology,Vol.7(13),2010--Pages45-51 Abstract: Climate change has now been globally recognized as a challenging threat to the humanity. The anthropogenic activities are also among the driving forces besides others. The consequent impacts on various sectors, especiallythe agriculture, are more pronounced. Due to fact that the weather/climate has no political boundaries thedeveloped industrial nations are polluting their regional environment and ecology. In this way the under developedand poor nations, like Pakistan, have to suffer severely. Besides this the availability and reservation of waterresources are also a giant challenge in future, on international as well on regional level. Also due to political andstrategic relationship to the neighboring countries, water availability would be a big problem for the country in near future. Future projections for climate are showing increasing trend in surface temperatures, which will ultimately augment some agro-meteorological elements like reference crop evapo-transpiration (ETo) etc. The current study is carried out to analyse the subsequent effects of increasing temperatures on ETo and on the agriculture water demand in the country. In the light of climate projections from various authentic sources like IPCC, increasing trends of 1-3C have been studied which is likely in next 50 years. It has been concluded that the southern half of Pakistan may be the least affected areas in the time to come. However, in northern half, a sharp increase in water demand as compared to the present will appear leading to the enhanced risk of crop failure in rain fed areas where supplementary irrigation is not available. This study will help in crop monitoring and in the assessment that how much water available in future for crops; which type of crops would suit the climate, Bettermanagement and building of new water reservoirs may help to cope the situation for an improved agriculture growth. Keywords: Climate Change, Anthropogenic, Agro-meteorology, Evapo-transpiration, Temperature Citedy By: 0 Climate change vulnerability and adaptation options for the coastal communities of Pakistan Author: KM Salik, S Jahangir,S ul Hasson Journal: Ocean & Coastal Management,Vol.112(),2015--Pages61-73 Abstract: This study aims to explore climate change induced socio-economic vulnerability of mangrove-dependent communities in the Indus Delta. We evaluate the linkages between vulnerability indicators by relating a community perceptions with observed and projected climate change scenarios. In evaluating these linkages, some key questions are considered such as: what are the likely socio-economic drivers contributing to community's sensitivity? Are these drivers impacting the community and how much is the community's coping potential to climate change? What are the key adaptation options necessary for increasing the community's resilience? This study is carried out in a coastal town (Keti Bandar), which is located in the Indus delta. This region is highly sensitive to declining fresh water flows, changing climate and meager socio-economic resources of local population. We have used the Composite Vulnerability Index (CVI) approach in order to draw a general picture of the community's vulnerability under a changing climate in Keti Bandar. The data for three CVI components (exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity) are collected at household level through questionnaire-based survey in six villages, however for exposure, secondary data is also acquired. Our assessment shows that these coastal communities, either engaged with the fishery or agriculture sector, are not only exposed, but are also highly sensitive to climate change driven threats. Moreover, lack of access to basic facilities, inadequate income diversification, and low education levels are negatively affecting the adaptive capacity of the entire local population. However, the communities' nature of dwelling, their strong family networks, and their ability to migrate contribute positively to their adaptive capacity. Keywords: Composite Vulnerability Index, Indus Delta, Exposure Sensitivity, Adaptive capacity Citedy By: 19 An Analysis of Knowledge Gaps in Climate Change Research Author: Ghulam Rasul Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology,Vol.7(13),2010--Pages1-9 Abstract: Climate change has posed a serious threat to whole humanity en masse, and an effective and collaborative effort by all communities is required to address this serious challenge. Organizations, at regional and global scale, are striving to unify the scientific community for collaborative and synergetic efforts to deal with the issue of global warming and climate change. Such cooperation, based on sharing of knowledge and expertise among the scientific community, is need worthy to tackle the issues related to global warming and climate change. Pakistan, in pursuit of solutions regarding climate change, has also given a serious attention by making an apex body The Task Force on Climate Change. The said has been established by the Prime Minister, which assembles quarterly and semi-annually to discuss the issues related to climate change and their ramifications. These meeting are chaired by the Prime Minister himself. Its mandate includes organization of climate change based research, assemblage of research groups, identification of the knowledge gaps, and assessment of the capacity and compilation of unified research results for the guidance of planners and policy makers. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Diagnostic Study of Heavy Downpour in the central part of Pakistan Author: Muhammad Aleem-ul-Hassan, Sajjad Haider, Kalim Ullah Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology,Vol.7(13),2010--Pages53-61 Abstract: Diagnosis of heavy rainfall event of July 2005 that caused urban flooding in Multan City, located in Punjab province of Pakistan has been carried out in the study. By using the conventional weather charts of Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD), National Centre for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) reanalysis data plots and analysis of temporal and spatial distribution of different weather parameters at the surface and in the upper air have been done. It is diagnosed that the heavy rainfall occurred under the influence of approaching monsoon depression, westerly wave prevailing over Kashmir and surrounding Himalayan region and its interaction with the upper air easterly wave. Besides this, the meso-scale low slightly northeast of the study area and an intensified ridge penetrating from northeast up to west of the study area, created the area of discontinuity that caused the interaction of northeastern and southwestern currents. The intensive heating in the last week of June and due to influence of westerly, a meso-scale low was formed in the leading trough of depression. The seasonal low was also realigned due to its interaction with westerly wave and the depression. Streamlines at lower level indicate that moisture transport from Arabian Sea was started two days prior to the event with maximum transport from 3rd July Night. On the basis of these synoptic features the amount of rainfall can be predicted well in time and therefore, it may help in minimizing the flood damages in the form of losses of human lives, soil erosion as well as managing the sewerage channels. Keywords: Conventional Weather Charts; Monsoon Depression; Mesoscale Low Citedy By: 0 Pakistan's two stage monsoon and links with the recent climate change Author: SY Wang, RE Davies,WR Huang Journal: Journal of Geophysical Research ,Vol.116(16),2011--Pages Abstract: Meteorological conditions related to the Pakistan floods of 2010 were examined in the context of monsoon dynamics and large-scale circulations. Case and climatological analyses suggest that summer precipitation in northern Pakistan comprises two distinct phases: (1) a pre-monsoon trough phase (July) whose rainfall is more episodic and intense, occurring prior to arrival of the monsoon trough, and (2) a monsoon trough phase (August) whose rainfall is persistent, yet less episodic, driven by northward migration of the monsoon trough. Analyses of conditional instability, moisture flux, and circulation features support a persistent increase in conditional instability during the July pre-monsoon trough phase, accompanied by increased frequency of heavy rainfall events. Conversely, evidence does not support intensification of the August monsoon trough phase. The increased convective activity during the pre-monsoon trough phase agrees with the projected increase in the intensity of heavy rainfall events over northern Pakistan. Large-scale circulation analysis reveals an upper-level cyclonic anomaly over and to the west of Pakistana feature empirically associated with weak monsoon. The analysis also suggests that the anomalous circulation in 2010 is not sporadic but rather is part of a long-term trend that defies the typical linkage of strong monsoons with an anomalous anticyclone in the upper troposphere. Keywords: Citedy By: 63 Estimation of Average Snow Cover over Northern Pakistan Author: Farrukh Bashir, Ghulam Rasul Journal: Pakistan Journal of Meteorology,Vol.7(13),2010--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is largely dependent on its frozen hydrological resources, i.e., snow cover and glaciated ice on the mountains of Northern Pakistan, as they maintain the perennial flows in riverine network of country. In winters, western depressions bestow substantial amount of snowfall on ranges of HKH housed by Northern Pakistan and in summers these frozen reserves feed rivers of Pakistan. The runoff is generally stored in reservoirs for hydropower generation and irrigation, therefore, it is imperative to measure snowmelt generated runoff for distribution and allocation of water for different objectives. As, snowmelt runoff is generated through melting of snow and glaciated ice, thus, precise estimation of snow cover of mountain ranges of HKH is highly desirable. To map snow cover over a large area is now viable with advancement of remote sensing using the platforms of satellite. Due to periodic revisits of satellites over the area of interest, it is now convenient to monitor the snow cover at regular intervals. Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) is a reliable sensor, due to its spatial, temporal and radiometric resolution, for mapping snow cover of Northern Pakistan. Images of MODIS, since its inception i.e., 2000 to 2010 are used in this study, as clouds offer obstruction in operation of satellite sensors in visible portion of electromagnetic radiation spectrum and area of interest experiences cloudiness most of the times, thus, endeavor is made to retrieve at least one image per week. Normalized Differential Snow Index (NDSI) is adopted to exploit different wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation to draw snow cover maps. Snow cover area is calculated in square kilometers and curves of snow cover extent are drawn for each year separately and an empirical relationship is made for average snow cover with respect to seasons. Keywords: Snow Cover, HKH, Northern Pakistan, Snow Melt Runoff, Remote Sensing, MODIS, Citedy By: 0 Projected changes in South Asian summer monsoon by multi-model global warming experiments Author: SS Sabade, A Kulkarni, RH Kripalani Journal: Theoretical and applied climatology,Vol.103(3-4),2011--Pages543-565 Abstract: South Asian summer monsoon (June through September) rainfall simulation and its potential future changes are evaluated in a multi-model ensemble of global coupled climate models outputs under World Climate Research Program Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (WCRP CMIP3) dataset. The response of South Asian summer monsoon to a transient increase in future anthropogenic radiative forcing is investigated for two time slices, middle (20312050) and end of the twenty-first century (20812100), in the non-mitigated Special Report on Emission Scenarios B1, A1B and A2 .There is large inter-model variability in the simulation of spatial characteristics of seasonal monsoon precipitation. Ten out of the 25 models are able to simulate spacetime characteristics of the South Asian monsoon precipitation reasonably well. The response of these selected ten models has been examined for projected changes in seasonal monsoon rainfall. The multi-model ensemble of these ten models projects a significant increase in monsoon precipitation with global warming. The substantial increase in precipitation is observed over western equatorial Indian Ocean and southern parts of India. However, the monsoon circulation weakens significantly under all the three climate change experiments. Possible mechanisms for the projected increase in precipitation and for precipitationwind paradox have been discussed. The surface temperature over Asian landmass increases in pre-monsoon months due to global warming and heat low over northwest India intensifies. The dipole snow configuration over Eurasian continent strengthens in warmer atmosphere, which is conducive for the enhancement in precipitation over Indian landmass. No notable changes have been projected in the El NioMonsoon relationship, which is useful for predicting interannual variations of the monsoon. Keywords: Monsoon, Rainfall, Equatorial Indian Ocean, Monsoon Precipitation, Indian Summer Monsoon, Rainfall Hadley Circulation Citedy By: 48 Anthropogenic aerosols and the weakening of the South Asian summer monsoon Author: MA Bollasina,Y Ming, V Ramaswamy Journal: Science,Vol.334(6055),2011--Pages502-505 Abstract: Observations show that South Asia underwent a widespread summertime drying during the second half of the 20th century, but it is unclear whether this trend was due to natural variations or human activities. We used a series of climate model experiments to investigate the South Asian monsoon response to natural and anthropogenic forcings. We find that the observed precipitation decrease can be attributed mainly to human-influenced aerosol emissions. The drying is a robust outcome of a slowdown of the tropical meridional overturning circulation, which compensates for the aerosol-induced energy imbalance between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. These results provide compelling evidence of the prominent role of aerosols in shaping regional climate change over South Asia. Keywords: Citedy By: 420 South Asian summer monsoon precipitation variability: coupled climate model simulations and projections under IPCC AR4 Author: RH Kripalani, JH Oh, A Kulkarni, SS Sabade Journal: Theoretical and Applied Climatology,Vol.90(3-4),2007--Pages133-159 Abstract: South Asian summer monsoon precipitation and its variability are examined from the outputs of the coupled climate models assessed as part of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment. Out of the 22 models examined, 19 are able to capture the maximum rainfall during the summer monsoon period (June through September) with varying amplitude. While two models are unable to reproduce the annual cycle well, one model is unable to simulate the summer monsoon season. The simulated inter-annual variability from the 19 models is examined with respect to the mean precipitation, coefficient of variation, long-term trends and the biennial tendency. The model simulated mean precipitation varies from 500?mm to 900?mm and coefficient of variation from 3 to 13%. While seven models exhibit long-term trends, eight are able to simulate the biennial nature of the monsoon rainfall. Six models, which generate the most realistic 20th century monsoon climate over south Asia, are selected to examine future projections under the doubling CO2scenario.Projections reveal a significant increase in mean monsoon precipitation of 8% and a possible extension of the monsoon period based on the multi-model ensemble technique. Extreme excess and deficient monsoons are projected to intensify. The projected increase in precipitation could be attributed to the projected intensification of the heat low over northwest India, the trough of low pressure over the Indo-Gangetic plains, and the landocean pressure gradient during the establishment phase of the monsoon. The intensification of these pressure systems could be attributed to the decline in winter/spring snowfall. Furthermore, a decrease of winter snowfall over western Eurasia is also projected along with an increase of winter snowfall over Siberia/eastern Eurasia. This projected dipole snow configuration during winter could imply changes in mid-latitude circulation conducive to subsequent summer monsoon precipitation activity. An increase in precipitable water of 1216% is projected over major parts of India. A maximum increase of about 2024% is found over the Arabian Peninsula, adjoining regions of Pakistan, northwest India and Nepal. Although the projected summer monsoon circulation appears to weaken, the projected anomalous flow over the Bay of Bengal (Arabian Sea) will support oceanic moisture convergence towards the southern parts of India and Sri Lanka (northwest India and adjoining regions). The ENSO-Monsoon relationship is also projected to weaken. Keywords: Summer Monsoon Monsoon Rainfall, Summer Monsoon Rainfall, Indian Monsoon Rainfall, South Asian Summer Monsoon Citedy By: 262 Managing the Indus River basin in light ofclimate change: Four conceptual approaches Author: JL Wescoat Jr Journal: GlobalEnvironmental Change,Vol.1(5),1991--Pages381-395 Abstract: Global warming raises troubling questions about the ecological and economic future of large irrigated river basins such as the Indus River in Pakistan. But it is not clear how potential impacts might best be identified or addressed. This article reports on a multidisciplinary study of four distinct conceptual approaches to climate change: climate scenarios assessment; critical water management problems; historic antecedents and analogies; and Muslim political reconstruction. Current scientific research emphasizes the first approach, but the other three may be more important for water managers in the basin. The article reviews previous research on water resources effects of climate change; introduces the Indus basin; discusses the four conceptual approaches; and finally discusses prospects for coordinating them. Keywords: Citedy By: 41 Thermal comfort of outdoor spaces in Lahore,Pakistan: Lessons for bioclimatic urban design in the context ofglobal climate change Author: N Mazhar,RD Brown,N Kenny,S Lenzholzer Journal: Landscape and UrbanPlanning ,Vol.138(),2015--Pages110-117 Abstract: Humans interact with urban microclimates through exchanges of energy. A surplus of energy can create thermal discomfort and be detrimental to human health. Many cities in warm regions all over the world are forecast to become very hot through global climate change. Some cities already experience extreme heat and have done so for centuries. We conducted a study of one such city in order to generate design guidelines for creating thermally comfortable outdoor places. In the hot, dry city of Lahore, Pakistan we compared the microclimates of two very different outdoor spaces. The first place was the 16th century Shalimar Garden, which contains much green infrastructure and water features. The other example was the hard-surfaced courtyard of the contemporary Alhamra Art Centre. In both places we measured the microclimatic characteristics and used those data to simulate thermal sensation through the energy-budget model COMFA. The measured air temperature and humidity in both spaces was similar. However, the solar radiation that would be received by a person in the Alhamra courtyard was much higher than in Shalimar Garden and was the main determinant of thermal discomfort. Results from this study can inform other cities in hot, dry climates about design responses that provide more outdoor thermal comfort and prevent health-threatening heat. Keywords: Landscape architecture, Microclimate, Energy budget, Model Citedy By: 18 Downscaling of precipitation forclimate changescenarios: a support vector machine approach Author: S Tripathi,VV Srinivas,RS Nanjundiah Journal: Journal of hydrology,Vol.330(3-4),2006--Pages621-640 Abstract: The Climate impact studies in hydrology often rely on climate change information at fine spatial resolution. However, general circulation models (GCMs), which are among the most advanced tools for estimating future climate change scenarios, operate on a coarse scale. Therefore the output from a GCM has to be downscaled to obtain the information relevant to hydrologic studies. In this paper, a support vector machine (SVM) approach is proposed for statistical downscaling of precipitation at monthly time scale. The effectiveness of this approach is illustrated through its application to meteorological sub-divisions (MSDs) in India. First, climate variables affecting spatio-temporal variation of precipitation at each MSD in India are identified. Following this, the data pertaining to the identified climate variables (predictors) at each MSD are classified using cluster analysis to form two groups, representing wet and dry seasons. For each MSD, SVM- based downscaling model (DM) is developed for season(s) with significant rainfall using principal components extracted from the predictors as input and the contemporaneous precipitation observed at the MSD as an output. The proposed DM is shown to be superior to conventional downscaling using multi-layer back-propagation artificial neural networks. Subsequently, the SVM-based DM is applied to future climate predictions from the second generation Coupled Global Climate Model (CGCM2) to obtain future projections of precipitation for the MSDs. The results are then analyzed to assess the impact of climate change on precipitation over India. It is shown that SVMs provide a promising alternative to conventional artificial neural networks for statistical downscaling, and are suitable for conducting climate impact studies. Keywords: Precipitation, Downscaling, Climate change, General circulation model, (GCM), Support vector machine, Neural network, Hydro climatology, India Citedy By: 365 Water management in the Indus basin inPakistan: challenges and opportunities Author: AS Qureshi Journal: Mountain Research and Development,Vol.31(3),2011--Pages252-260 Abstract: The Indus River basin supplies water to the largest contiguous irrigation system in the world, providing water for 90% of the food production in Pakistan, which contributes 25% of the country's gross domestic product. But Pakistan could face severe food shortages intimately linked to water scarcity. It is projected that, by 2025, the shortfall of water requirements will be ?32%, which will result in a food shortage of 70 million tons. Recent estimates suggest that climate change and siltation of main reservoirs will reduce the surface water storage capacity by 30% by 2025. The per capita water storage capacity in Pakistan is only 150m3, compared with more than 5000m3in the United States and Australia and 2200m3in China. This reduction in surface supplies and consequent decreases in groundwater abstraction will have a serious effect on irrigated agriculture. Supply-side solutions aimed at providing more water will not be available as in the past. Current low productivity in comparison with what has been achieved in other countries under virtually similar conditions points to the enormous potential that exists. To harness this potential, Pakistan needs to invest soon in increasing storage capacity, improving water-use efficiency, and managing surface-water and groundwater resources in a sustainable way to avoid problems of soil salinization and waterlogging. Building capacity between individuals and organizations, and strengthening institutions are key elements for sustaining irrigated agriculture in the Indus Basin. Keywords: Water management, food security, irrigated agriculture, salinity, water-logging, Indus Basin, Pakistan Citedy By: 50 Disaster risks and disaster management policies and practices inPakistan: A critical analysis of Disaster Management Act 2010 ofPakistan Author: Z Ahmed Journal: International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction ,Vol.4(),2013--Pages15-20 Abstract: Human suffering has multiplied in recent years due to increased frequency and intensity of natural hazards, which are expected to rise in the coming years due to climate change. Admittedly, risks to humans from natural hazards cannot be eliminated completely, but they can be reduced through systematic approaches such as disaster risks reduction (DRR) approaches that can be scientifically applied for minimising vulnerability and building resilience in society through multi-sectoral and multi-dimensional measures. Considering the importance of DRR approaches in reducing impacts of disasters, the aim of this paper is to analyse the disaster risk and disaster management policies and practices in Pakistan. The objective is to evaluate the Disaster Management Act 2010 in Pakistan (PNDMA 2010). Through critical review of PNDMA 2010, this study has found that the Act emphasises mainly on institution building and action plan development for mitigating disasters in the country. The Act does not directly mention disaster risk reduction and there are no directions with regard to the budgetary mechanisms and extent of funds from disaster risk management (DRM) in the country. The DRM in Pakistan is reactive and there is a need for revision of PDMA 2010 to make it proactive. Keywords: Natural disasters Disaster risk reduction (DRR) Natural hazards Citedy By: 31 Climate change, flooding in South Asia and implications Author: MMQ Mirza Journal: Regional Environmental Change,Vol.11(),2011--Pages95-107 Abstract: South Asia is one of the most flood vulnerable regions in the world. Floods occur often in the region triggered by heavy monsoon precipitation and can cause enormous damages to lives, property, crops and infrastructure. The frequency of extreme floods is on the rise in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. Past extreme floods fall within the range of climate variability but frequency, magnitude and extent flooding may increase in South Asia in future due to climate change. Flood risk is sensitive to different levels of warming. For example, in Bangladesh, analysis shows that most of the expected changes in flood depth and extent would occur between 0 and 2C warming. The three major rivers Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna/Barak will play similar roles in future flooding regimes as they are doing presently. Increases in future flooding can cause extensive damage to rice crops in the monsoon. This may have implications for food security especially of poor women and children. Floods can also impact public health in the flood plains and in the coastal areas. Keywords: Climate change Flooding South Asia Crop damage Food security Citedy By: 112 On rising temperature trends of Karachi inPakistan Author: SH Sajjad, B Hussain, MA Khan, A Raza, B Zaman Journal: Climatic change,Vol.96(4),2009--Pages539-547 Abstract: Karachi is the largest city of Pakistan. The temperature change in Karachi is studied in this research by analyzing the time series data of mean maximum temperature (MMxT), mean minimum temperature (MMiT) and mean annual temperature (MAT) from 1947 to 2005 (59years). Data is analyzed in three parts by running linear regression and by taking anomalies of all time periods: (a) whole period from 19472005; (b) phase one 19471975 and (c) phase two 19762005. During 1947 to 2005 MMxT has increased about 4.6C, MMiT has no change and MAT has increased 2.25C. During 19471975, MMxT increased 1.9C, in this period there is ??1.3C decrease in MMiT and MAT has raised upto 0.3C. During 19762005, the MMxT, MMiT and MAT increased 2.7C, 1.2C and 1.95C, respectively. The analysis shows significantly the role of extreme vulnerability of MMxT in rising the temperature of Karachi than the MMiT. Keywords: Time Series DataUrban Heat IslandYangtze River DeltaMean Annual TemperatureUrban Climate Citedy By: 32 Climate Changein South Asia Author: MVK Sivakumar, R Stefanski Journal: Climate changeand food security in South Asia,Vol.(),2010--Pages13-30 Abstract: South Asia is home to over one fifth of the worlds population and is known to be the most disaster prone region in the world. The high rates of population growth, and natural resource degradation, with continuing high rates of poverty and food insecurity make South Asia one of the most vulnerable regions to the impacts of climate change. In general, past and present climate trends and variability in South Asia can be characterized by increasing air temperatures and there is an increasing trend in the intensity and frequency of extreme events in South Asia over the last century. Temperature projections for South Asia for the twenty-first century suggest a significant acceleration of warming over that observed in the twentieth century. Recent modelling experiments indicate that the warming would be significant in Himalayan Highlands including the Tibetan Plateau and arid regions of Asia. An increase in occurrence of extreme weather events including heat wave and intense precipitation events is projected in South Asia, along with an increase in the inter-annual variability of daily precipitation in the Asian summer monsoon. The projected impacts of climate change in South Asia will vary across sectors, locations and populations. Temperature rise will negatively impact crop yields in tropical parts of South Asia where these crops are already being grown close to their temperature tolerance threshold. While direct impacts are associated with rise in temperatures, indirect impacts due to water availability and changing soil moisture status and pest and disease incidence are likely to be felt. The most significant impacts are likely to be borne by small-holder rainfed farmers who constitute the majority of farmers in this region and possess low financial and technical capacity to adapt to climate variability and change. The projected impacts of climate change in different parts of South Asia are described. The coping capacity of the rural poor, especially in the marginal areas, is low and there is a need to mainstream the good practices for adaptation to climate change into sustainable development planning in the region. Improved understanding of the climate change impacts, vulnerability and the adaptation practices to cope with climate change could help this process. Keywords: Indian sub-continent, Mangroves, El-Nio, ENSO,Rainfall, variability, Productivity, Fisheries, Sea level rise Citedy By: 57 Monitoring spatio-temporal aerosol patterns over Pakistan based on MODIS, TOMS and MISR satellite data and a HYSPLIT model Author: K Alam,S Qureshi,T Blaschke Journal: Atmospheric Environment,Vol.45(27),2011--Pages4641-4651 Abstract: Three different satellite-borne sensors, namely the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectro-radiometer (MODIS), and the Multi-angle Imaging Spectro-radiometer (MISR), were used to investigate the spatial and temporal variations of aerosols over several cities in Pakistan. A Hybrid Single Particle Lagrangian Integrated Trajectory (HYSPLIT) model was used for trajectory analysis in order to reconstruct the origins of air masses and understand the spatio-temporal variability of aerosol concentrations. Recent MODIS aerosol data (20022008) and earlier TOMS data (19792001) revealed increasing concentrations of aerosols over Pakistan and adjacent areas. Validation of MODIS and MISR derived aerosol optical depths (AODs) with Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) data for 2007 demonstrated that the MISR data was more accurate when close to the ocean, while the MODIS was more accurate over vegetated areas. The relationship between MODIS and MISR AOD data from 2002 to 2008 was analyzed, revealing a strong correlation between the two datasets. An assessment of seasonal variability in AOD for industrial, urban, semi-urban, rural, and semi-arid areas revealed maximum AOD values during the summer over all the areas investigated. Back trajectory analyses indicated that while winter air masses reaching Pakistan had travelled long distances, summer air masses had travelled only short distances. The higher aerosol concentrations during the summer are interpreted to be a result of the air masses spending more time over land during the summer than they do during the winter. While monsoonal rainfall tends to reduce aerosol concentrations by washing aerosols out of the atmosphere, this effect is mainly restricted to the eastern and south-eastern parts of Pakistan. Keywords: Aerosols, TOMS, MODIS, MISR, AERONET HYSPLIT, AOD, Remote sensing, Pakistan Citedy By: 77 Climate changeaffecting rice production: the physiological and agronomic basis for possible adaptation strategies Author: R Wassmann,SVK Jagadish, S Heuer, A Ismail Journal: Advances inAgronomy,Vol.101(),2009--Pages59-122 Abstract: This review addresses possible adaptation strategies in rice production to abiotic stresses that will aggravate under climate change: heat (high temperature and humidity), drought, salinity, and submergence. Each stress is discussed regarding the current state of knowledge on damage mechanism for rice plants as well as possible developments in germplasm andcrop managementtechnologies to overcome production losses. Higher temperatures can adversely affect rice yields through two principal pathways, namely (i) high maximum temperatures that causein combination with high humidityspikelet sterility and adversely affect grain quality and (ii) increased nighttime temperatures that may reduce assimilate accumulation. On the other hand, some ricecultivarsare grown in extremely hot environments, so that the development of rice germplasm with improved heat resistance can capture an enormousgenetic poolfor this trait. Likewise, drought is a common phenomenon in many rice growing environments, and agriculture research has achieved considerable progress in terms of germplasm improvement and crop management (i.e., water saving techniques) to cope with the complexity of the drought syndrome. Rice is highly sensitive to salinity. Salinity often coincides with other stresses in rice production, namely drought in inland areas or submergence in coastal areas. Submergence tolerance of rice plants has substantially been improved by introgressing theSub1gene into popular rice cultivars in many Asian rice growing areas.Finally, the review comprises a comparative assessment of the riceversusother crops related to climate change. The rice crop has many unique features in terms of susceptibility and adaptation to climate change impacts due to its semiaquatic phylogenetic origin. The bulk of global rice supply originates from irrigated systems which are to some extent shielded from immediate drought effects. The buffer effect of irrigation against climate change impacts, however, will depend on nature and state of the respective irrigation system. The envisaged propagation ofirrigation watersaving techniques will entail benefits for the resilience of rice production systems to future droughts. We conclude that there are considerable risks for rice production stemming from climate change, but that the development of necessary adaptation options can capitalize on an enormous variety of rice production systems in very different climates and on encouraging progress in recent research. Keywords: Citedy By: 279 Pedogenic carbonate proxies for amount and seasonality of precipitation in paleosols Author: GJ Retallack Journal: Geology,Vol.33(4),2005--Pages333-336 Abstract: The depth to carbonate nodular (Bk) horizon in soils (Din cm) is correlated with mean annual precipitation (Pin mm), so that Bk horizons are deep in subhumid regions, but shallow in semiarid regions. Previous quantifications of this relationship are unchanged by this new compilation of 807 soils:P= 137.24 + 6.45D+ 0.013D2, whereR2= 0.52, and standard error (S.E.) = 147 mm. In most North American postglacial soils, the Bk horizon is thin and well defined, whereas in monsoonal tropical soils of Pakistan and Kenya, the Bk horizon is thick and diffuse. Data from 675 modern soils define the relationship between the thickness of soil with nodules (Tin cm) and mean annual range of precipitation (Min mm difference between monthly means of wettest and driest months):M= 0.79T+ 13.71, whereR2= 0.58, and S.E. = 22 mm). The relationship between carbonate nodule size (Sin cm) and soil age (Ain ka) is quantified by 9 radiocarbon-dated soils from Las Cruces, New Mexico:A= 3.92S0.34, whereR2= 0.57, and S.E. = 1.8 k.y. These transfer functions are applied to reconstructing paleoclimatic change from PaleoceneEocene paleosols of the North Horn Formation and Flagstaff Limestone of Axhandle Canyon, Utah. The terminal Paleocene spike of warmth recorded by fossil plants in nearby Wyoming was coincident with a brief peak in both mean annual precipitation and mean annual range of precipitation in Utah. Keywords: Citedy By: 237 An overview of theGlobalHistorical Climatology Network temperature database Author: TC Peterson, RS Vose Journal: Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society,Vol.78(12),1997--Pages2837-2850 Abstract: The Global Historical Climatology Network version 2 temperature database was released in May 1997. This century-scale dataset consists of monthly surface observations from ~7000 stations from around the world. This archive breaks considerable new ground in the field of global climate databases. The enhancements include 1) data for additional stations to improve regional-scale analyses, particularly in previously data-sparse areas; 2) the addition of maximumminimum temperature data to provide climate information not available in mean temperature data alone; 3) detailed assessments of data quality to increase the confidence in research results; 4) rigorous and objective homogeneity adjustments to decrease the effect of nonclimatic factors on the time series; 5) detailed metadata (e.g., population, vegetation, topography) that allow more detailed analyses to be conducted; and 6) an infrastructure for updating the archive at regular intervals so that current climatic conditions can constantly be put into historical perspective. This paper describes these enhancements in detail. Keywords: Global Climate Laboratory, National Climatic Data Center, Asheville, North Carolina. Citedy By: 0 Adapting food systems of the Indo-Gangetic plains toglobalenvironmental change: key information needs to improve policy formulation Author: PK Aggarwal,PK Joshi,JSI Ingram Journal: Environmental Science &Policy,Vol.7(6),2004--Pages487-498 Abstract: The Indo-Gangetic plain (IGP; including regions of Pakistan, India, Nepal, and Bangladesh) is generally characterised by fertile soils, favourable climate and an abundant supply of water. Nevertheless, the challenge of increasing food production in the IGP in line with demand grows ever greater; any perturbation in agriculture will considerably affect the food systems of the region and increase the vulnerability of the resource-poor population. Increasing regional production is already complicated by increasing competition for land resources by non-agricultural sectors and by the deterioration of agri-environments and water resources. Global environmental change (GEC), especially changes in climate mean values and variability, will further complicate the agricultural situation and will therefore, have serious implications for food systems of the region. Strategies to reduce the vulnerability of the region's food systems to GEC need to be based on a combination of technical and policy options, and developed in recognition of the concurrent changes in socioeconomic stresses. Adaptation options need to be assessed with regard to their socioeconomic and environmental efficacy, but a greater understanding of the interactions of food systems with GEC is needed to be able to do this with confidence. This paper discusses information needs relating to resource management and policy support to guide the development of research planning for increasing the robustness of IGP food systems to GEC. Further information is needed to develop a range of adaptation strategies including augmenting production and its sustainability, increasing income from agricultural enterprises, diversification from ricewheat systems, improving land use and natural resource management, and instigating more flexible policies and institutions. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Toward renewed legitimacy? Nuclear power,global warming, and security Author: P Stoett Journal: Global Environmental Politics,Vol.3(1),2003--Pages99-116 Abstract: With calls for the renewal of the nuclear energy industry in the United States and elsewhere, the international political economy of this troubled industry assumes increased importance. Though technical difficulties have plagued the industry for many decades, it is the equally problematic task of establishing public trust on which the article focuses. Arguably, with the advent of widespread concern over global warming, nuclear power offers a low-emission alternative. Yet safety, security, and political concerns color this highly centralized energy source, as well as its export-based political economy. The article traces the history of global nuclear commerce, as well as recent attempts to revive the industry. I suggest that efforts to re-legitimize the state-industry-power complex by way of nuclear commerce and associated discourse may have some success, but this will be tempered by sustained opposition to the centralizing tendencies of nuclear power and continued safety concerns Keywords: Citedy By: 33 Exercising multidisciplinary approach to assess interrelationship between energy use, carbon emission and land use change in a metropolitan city ofPakistan Author: G Ali,V Nitivattananon Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.16(1),2012--Pages775-786 Abstract: Population of two cities in Pakistan has already crossed the 10-million figure and for the rest of the areas in the country populations are also increasing rapidly. Urbanization has boosted the use of energy in the cities and so is greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions but the ground situation as to the extent, vulnerability, past trends and future scenarios are not unveiled for the cities of Pakistan. Dearth of data in Pakistan is a huge hindrance to the investigation of energy use and actual GHG emissions. We dared to take steps in addressing this case and put preliminary efforts in compiling baseline sectoral breakdown of energy use, carbon emission and land cover/land use. Furthermore, the relationship of CO2 source and sink is also explored. This study mainly tries to achieve three objectives. The results illustrate that industrial and residential sectors are vibrant consumers of energy and CO2 emitters among all other sectors of the city. Sparse trees in the city and reduced agriculture areas by more than one-half in 2009 compared with those in 1975 are the main reasons for increased energy use and reduced CO2 emissions from agriculture sector as well. However, all the other sectors have increased their CO2 emissions in an escalating trend. The forecast analysis portrays the same trend too. Therefore, there is a need to make policy makers recognize such vulnerable situation of energy use and GHG emissions for them to take proper and timely actions to cope with the threats of climate change which can occur anytime in the very near future. Keywords: CO2 emissions Sinksource relationship Multidisciplinary approach Remote sensing Citedy By: 0 Ice velocity and climate variations for Baltoro Glacier,Pakistan Author: DJ Quincey,L Copland,C Mayer,M Bishop Journal: Journal ofGlaciology ,Vol.55(194),2009--Pages1061-1071 Abstract: The recent dynamic behaviour of Karakoram glaciers is expected to differ from that shown by glaciers in the central and eastern Himalaya because of regional variations in precipitation and temperature trends. However, there are insufficient quantitative data to support or confute such hypotheses. We present velocity data covering the period 19932008 for Baltoro Glacier, one of the longest glaciers in the Karakoram. Velocity measurements were made using cross-correlation feature tracking applied to European Remote-sensing Satellite (ERS-1 and -2) and Envisat advanced synthetic aperture radar (ASAR) data, supplemented by differential global positioning system (DGPS) measurements. We find a gradual acceleration of the glacier during the early 2000s, in particular during winter months. Multi-seasonal data reveal a large difference between summer and winter flow characteristics, but only in the upper ablation zone. Summer 2005 was a particularly dynamic period following from the heavy winter snowfall of 2004, indicating the importance of basal meltwater availability for glacier flow. Transverse velocity profiles indicate that Baltoro Glacier undergoes block flow across much of the upper ablation zone during the summer, which we interpret as evidence of widespread basal sliding. The DGPS data confirm the rapid increase in flow detected during 2005. Modelled climatic data reveal decreasing summer temperatures and increasing precipitation over the study period, helping to explain the observed dynamic variations and their differences from glaciers elsewhere in the Himalaya. Keywords: Citedy By: 78 Implications ofclimate changein sustained agricultural productivity in South Asia Author: M Lal Journal: Regional Environmental Change,Vol.11(),2011--Pages79-94 Abstract: One of the targets of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals adopted in 2000 is to cut in half the number of people who are suffering from hunger between 1990 and 2015. However, crop yield growth has slowed down in much of the world because of declining investments in agricultural research, irrigation, and rural infrastructure and increasing water scarcity. New challenges to food security are posed by accelerated climatic change. Considerable uncertainties remain as to when, where and how climate change will affect agricultural production. Even less is known about how climate change might influence other aspects that determine food security, such as accessibility of food for various societal groups and the stability of food supply. This paper presents the likely impacts of thermal and hydrological stresses as a consequence of projected climate change in the future potential agriculture productivity in South Asia based on the crop simulation studies with a view to identify critical climate thresholds for sustained food productivity in the region. The study suggests that, on an aggregate level, there might not be a significant impact of global warming on food production of South Asia in the short term (<2C; until 2020s), provided water for irrigation is available and agricultural pests could be kept under control. The increasing frequency of droughts and floods would, however, continue to seriously disrupt food supplies on year to year basis. In long term (2050s and beyond), productivity of Kharif crops would decline due to increased climate variability and pest incidence and virulence. Production of Rabi crops is likely to be more seriously threatened in response to 2C warming. The net cereal production in South Asia is projected to decline at least between 4 and 10% under the most conservative climate change projections (a regional warming of 3C) by the end of this century. In terms of the reference to UNFCCC Article 2 on dangerous anthropogenic (human-induced) interference with the climate system, the critical threshold for sustained food productivity in South Asia appears to be a rise in surface air temperature of ~2C and a marginal decline in water availability for irrigation or decrease in rainfall during the cropping season. Keywords: Climatic change and food securitySouth AsiaCrop simulation modelsNet cereal productionWater availability for irrigation Citedy By: 52 Turning the tide: recognizingclimate changerefugees in international law Author: A Williams Journal: Law & Policy,Vol.30(4),2008--Pages502-529 Abstract: Many of the debates surrounding the environmental, social, and economic implications of climate change are now well known. However, there is increasing concern over the extent to which those suffering displacement or forced migration as a result of climate change are protected. This article seeks to highlight the plight of such individuals and suggests how the current protection gap might be remedied. Present legal structures, such as the Refugee Convention and the framework for Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), prove largely inadequate having been constructed for different purposes and being limited in their application. The alternative proposed in this article is a regionally oriented regime operating under the auspices of the UN Climate Change Framework. While both the Climate Change Convention and the Kyoto Protocol currently call for regional cooperation in respect of adaptation activities, it is argued there should be an explicit recognition of so-called climate change refugees in the post-Kyoto agreement that allows for, and facilitates, the development of regional programs to address the problem. Employing such a strategy would remedy the current protection gap that exists within the international legal system, while allowing states to respond and engage with climate change displacement in the most regionally appropriate manner Keywords: Citedy By: 172 Prospects for secure and sustainable electricity supply forPakistan Author: T Muneer,M Asif Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.11(4),2007--Pages654-671 Abstract: Fossil fuel reserves are diminishing rapidly across the world, intensifying the stress on existing reserves day-by-day due to increased demand. Not only that, fossil fuels, presently contributing to 80% of world primary energy, are inflicting enormous impacts on environment. Energy sector has a key role in this regard since energy during its production, distribution and consumption is responsible for producing environmentally harmful substances. There is an urgent need for a quicker switch over of energy systems from conventional to renewables that are sustainable and can meet the present and projected world energy demand. Hydrogen, in the capacity of energy vector and storage medium is expected to be the optimum solution for intermittency and storage of energy produced by renewables. Within the context of Pakistan solar and wind power are two of the most promising renewables.In this article, the current energy consumption for Pakistan is presented and the issue of security of electrical energy supply is discussed. Furthermore, the prospects for a large-scale switch over to renewables are also addressed and the relevant economies and underpinning rationale provided. It has been found that solar energy is a much more economical choice for Pakistan as compared to wind energy-respective costs for solar and wind energy are (US cents/kWh) 20 and 77. This is due to the fact barring the four monsoon months, the average wind speed for the remaining 8 months does not cross an economic threshold. On the contrary, it was found that solar energy has a fairly stable and consistent availability. Keywords: Sustainability, Renewable, Solar energy, Wind power, Photovoltaic, Hydrogen Citedy By: 77 An introduction to the IBMR, a hydro-economic model for climate change impact assessment in Pakistan's Indus River basin Author: YCE Yang, CM Brown,WH Yu, A Savitsky Journal: Water International,Vol.38(5),2013--Pages Abstract: The Indus Basin Model Revised (IBMR) is a hydro-agro-economic optimization model for agricultural investment planning across Pakistans Indus Basin provinces. This study describes IBMR-2012, an update and modification of the model that reflects the current agro-economic conditions in Pakistan for the purpose of evaluating the impact of climate change on water allocation and food security. Results of hydro-climatic parameter sensitivity and basin-wide and provincial-level climate change impacts on crop productions are presented. The study finds that compared to Punjab, Sindh faces both significantly larger climate change impacts on agriculture and higher uncertainty regarding climate change impacts in the future. Keywords: Indus Basin Model Revised,Pakistan,water allocation,GCM uncertainty,climate Citedy By: 23 Climate changeimpacts and adaptation options for water and food inPakistan: scenario analysis using an integratedglobalwater and food projections model Author: T Zhu,C Ringler, MM Iqbal,TB Sulser Journal: Water International ,Vol.38(5),2013--Pages Abstract: Climate change is expected to considerably affect the water resources in the Indus River basin in Pakistan and thus agricultural production in the country. This article reports an analysis of the impacts of various climate scenarios on both water resources and food production out to 2050. While changes in water availability range from 12% to +24%, depending on the scenario, crop yield and production impacts are negative across all scenarios, and net food imports increase. We suggest a combination of accelerated investment in agricultural research and increased water-use efficiency in agriculture to reduce the adverse impacts of climate change on water and food. Keywords: agriculture,irrigation,climate change,food security,Pakistan Citedy By: 13 Greenhouse effect reduction by recovering energy from waste landfills inPakistan Author: MJS Zuberi,SF Ali Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.44(),2015--Pages117-131 Abstract: Landfills all around the world are one of the major sources that contribute towards global warming and climate change. Although landfilling should be prioritized last in the waste management hierarchy due to highest greenhouse gas emissions as compared to other waste management systems it is still very common around the world. In this study, methane emissions are estimated by applying First Order Decay model to landfills in Pakistan over the latest data available by Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency. Results demonstrate that nearly 14.18 Gg of methane is emitted from the landfills in Pakistan each year. By combusting this methane in the form of biogas collected from the landfills as a waste management scheme we can reduce greenhouse effect up to ~88%. Same percentage is observed when we apply the similar analysis over the potentially improved practice. Also, Pakistan is facing severe economic crises due to continuous increasing gap between energy demand and supply. Demand is increasing exponentially while supply is observed to remain constant over the last few years due to frozen capacity in spite of having significant renewable/alternate energy resources. Current electricity shortfall has reached up to 6000 MW. Present operational landfills in Pakistan can only contribute up to ~0.1% to cater the total deficit which does not make any significant difference but if 75% of the total waste generated today is collected and 50% of it landfilled then Pakistan has the potential to produce ~83.17 MW of power that can contribute up to 1.4% to overcome the current power shortage. The outcomes of this paper may also be applicable to other developing countries having similar resources. Keywords: Landfills, Renewable energy Biogas Greenhouse effect Pakistan Citedy By: 34 The linkages between deforestation, energy and growth for environmental degradation inPakistan Author: K Ahmed,M Shahbaz, A Qasim, W Journal: Ecological Indicators,Vol.49(),2015--Pages95-103 Abstract: This study explores the validation of the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) hypothesis for Pakistan using time series data from 19802013 with deforestation as an indicator (dependent variable) for environmental degradation, and four independent variables (economic growth, energy consumption, trade openness, and population) were also examined. The Autoregressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) bounds testing approach to cointegration and the VECMGranger causality test were applied. The results confirmed the existence of cointegration among the variables both in long- and short-run paths. However, the diminishing negative impact of economic growth on deforestation in the long-run confirms the EKC hypothesis for deforestation in Pakistan. Moreover, economic growth and energy consumption Granger cause deforestation. A bidirectional causal effect is detected between economic growth and energy consumption, however, in the long-run, economic growth and trade openness Granger cause energy consumption. This study was designed with several significant tests to ensure the reliability of results for policy use and to contribute to future studies on the environment-growth-energy nexus. Keywords: Deforestation, Energy Consumption, Environmental Kuznets Curve, Co integration Citedy By: 0 Recent mean temperature trends in Pakistan and links with teleconnection patterns Author: S del Rio, M Anjum Iqbal, A Cano?Ortiz Journal: International Journal of Climatology,Vol.33(2),2013--Pages277-290 Abstract: Monthly, seasonal and annual trends in mean temperatures have been analysed in this study using data from 37 weather stations from the Pakistan Meteorological Department with records from 1952 to 2009. Statistical tests including Sen's slope and Mann-Kendall were applied to each of the 37 stations in order to determine the sign and slopes of trends and their statistical significance. The study reveals that the temperature has generally increased in Pakistan at all time scales analysed over the past few decades. March and the pre-monsoon season were the periods with the highest number of weather stations showing statistical significance, and also with the highest magnitudes of trends. Mean annual temperature increased around 0.36 C/decade. This rise in temperature is slightly higher than other results found for Pakistan. The association between temperatures and certain teleconnection patterns, as well as the influence of the urban effect, might be among the causes of the trends found in this study. The largest number of correlations between mean temperatures and teleconnection patterns was found in March, April and May with NAO, ENSO and NCP, respectively. The North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) may also have an influence on the temperatures of certain months in the monsoon season and particularly in August. At a seasonal resolution, NAO and NCP may control temperatures in the pre-monsoon season. The lowest number of sites exhibiting correlations was found in winter and in the post-monsoon seasons Keywords: Citedy By: 26 Research on global changes in Pakistan Author: R Roohi Journal: Developments in Earth Surface Processes,Vol.10(),2007--Pages329-340 Abstract: The research on climate change in Pakistan is in its initial stages and has started with the commencement of the new century. Realizing the importance and potential impact of climate change on natural resources and population and their sustainable development, several projects have been initiated in collaboration with international institutions such as APN, ICIMOD, UNEP, START, and others. The focus of these initiatives is on the impact of climate change on various components of the complex system such as water resources, ecology, agriculture, socio-economics, and others. So far these activities have been centered on the resource inventories/vulnerability assessment and identification of potential threats based on which coping mechanisms could be identified and policy recommendations could be formulated. Using historical climatic data it has been concluded that since 1931 in general the extreme temperatures in the arid environments have increased while in sub-humid and humid environments these have been decreased. Several studies have been carried out to use the simulation models for climate change impact on water resources, forest ecosystems, and socioeconomic conditions. Recently an inventory of glaciers and glacial lakes in the Hindu Kush Karakoram Himalayan (HKKH) region of Pakistan has been completed. A Global Change Impact Study Center has also been established. Keywords: Citedy By: 15 Diagnosing irrigation performance and water productivity through satellite remote sensing and secondary data in a large irrigation system of Pakistan Author: MD Ahmad, H Turral, A Nazeer Journal: Agricultural Water Management,Vol.96(4),2009--Pages551-564 Abstract: Irrigation policy makers and managers need information on the irrigation performance and productivity of water at various scales to devise appropriate water management strategies, in particular considering dwindling water availability, further threats from climate change, and continually rising population and food demand. In practice it is often difficult to access sufficient water supply and use data to determine crop water consumption and irrigation performance. Energy balance techniques using remote sensing data have been developed by various researchers over the last 20 years, and can be used as a tool to directly estimate actual evapo-transpiration, i.e., water consumption. This study demonstrates how remote sensing-based estimates of water consumption and water stress combined with secondary agricultural production data can provide better estimates of irrigation performance, including water productivity, at a variety of scales than alternative options. A principle benefit of the described approach is that it allows identification of areas where agricultural performance is less than potential, thereby providing insights into where and how irrigation systems can be managed to improve overall performance and increase water productivity in a sustainable manner. To demonstrate the advantages, the approach was applied in Rechna Doab irrigation system of Pakistans Punjab Province. Remote sensing-based indicators reflecting equity, adequacy, reliability and water productivity were estimated. Inter- and intra-irrigation subdivision level variability in irrigation performance, associated factors and improvement possibilities are discussed. Keywords: Actual evapo-transpiration, Equity, Adequacy, Reliability, Water productivity, Surface energy balance Citedy By: 89 Widespreadclimate changein the Himalayas and associated changes in local ecosystems Author: UB Shrestha, S Gautam, KS Bawa Journal: PLoS One,Vol.7(5),2012--Pages Abstract: Climate change in the Himalayas, a biodiversity hotspot, home of many sacred landscapes, and the source of eight largest rivers of Asia, is likely to impact the well-being of ?20% of humanity. However, despite the extraordinary environmental, cultural, and socio-economic importance of the Himalayas, and despite their rapidly increasing ecological degradation, not much is known about actual changes in the two most critical climatic variables: temperature and rainfall. Nor do we know how changes in these parameters might impact the ecosystems including vegetation phenology. By analyzing temperature and rainfall data, and NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) values from remotely sensed imagery, we report significant changes in temperature, rainfall, and vegetation phenology across the Himalayas between 1982 and 2006. The average annual mean temperature during the 25 year period has increased by 1.5C with an average increase of 0.06C yr?1. The average annual precipitation has increased by 163 mm or 6.52 mmyr?1. Since changes in temperature and precipitation are immediately manifested as changes in phenology of local ecosystems, we examined phenological changes in all major ecoregions. The average start of the growing season (SOS) seems to have advanced by 4.7 days or 0.19 days yr?1 and the length of growing season (LOS) appears to have advanced by 4.7 days or 0.19 days yr?1, but there has been no change in the end of the growing season (EOS). There is considerable spatial and seasonal variation in changes in climate and phenological parameters.This is the first time that large scale climatic and phenological changes at the landscape level have been documented for the Himalayas. The rate of warming in the Himalayas is greater than the global average, confirming that the Himalayas are among the regions most vulnerable to climate change. Keywords: Citedy By: 177 Asian monsoon failure and megadrought during the last millennium Author: ER Cook,KJ Anchukaitis,BM Buckley Journal: Science,Vol.328(5977),2010--Pages486-489 Abstract: The Asian monsoon system affects more than half of humanity worldwide, yet the dynamical processes that govern its complex spatiotemporal variability are not sufficiently understood to model and predict its behavior, due in part to inadequate long-term climate observations. Here we present the Monsoon Asia Drought Atlas (MADA), a seasonally resolved gridded spatial reconstruction of Asian monsoon drought and pluvials over the past millennium, derived from a network of tree-ring chronologies. MADA provides the spatiotemporal details of known historic monsoon failures and reveals the occurrence, severity, and fingerprint of previously unknown monsoon megadroughts and their close linkages to large-scale patterns of tropical Indo-Pacific sea surface temperatures. MADA thus provides a long-term context for recent monsoon variability that is critically needed for climate modeling, prediction, and attribution. Keywords: Citedy By: 635 Changes in precipitation extremes over arid to semiarid and subhumid Punjab,Pakistan Author: F Abbas,A Ahmad,M Safeeq,S Ali,F Saleem Journal: Theoretical and applied,Vol.116(3-4),2014--Pages671-680 Abstract: Asymmetrical monsoons during the recent past have resulted into spatially variable and devastating floods in South Asia. Analysis of historic precipitation extremes record may help in formulating mitigation strategies at local level. Eleven indices of precipitation extremes were evaluated using RClimDex and daily time series data for analysis period of 19812010 from five representative cities across Punjab province of Pakistan. The indices include consecutive dry days, consecutive wet days, number of days above daily average precipitation, number of days with precipitation ?10 mm, number of days with precipitation ?20 mm, very wet days, extremely wet days, simple daily intensity index, maximum 1-day precipitation quantity, maximum 5 consecutive day precipitation quantity, and annual total wet-day precipitation. Mann-Kendall test and Sens slope extremes were used to detect trends in indices. Droughts and excessive precipitation were dictated by elevation from mean sea level with prolonged dry spells in southern Punjab and vice versa confirming spatial trends for precipitation extremes. However, no temporal trend was observed for any of the indices. Summer in the region is the wettest season depicting contribution of monsoons during June through August toward devastating floods in the region. Keywords: Precipitation ExtremeHeavy PrecipitationAnalysis PeriodPrecipitation IndexPunjab Province Citedy By: 30 Changes in daily temperature and precipitation extremes in central and south Asia Author: AMG Klein Tank, TC Peterson Journal: Journal ofGeological Research,Vol.111(16),2006--Pages Abstract: Changes in indices of climate extremes are studied on the basis of daily series of temperature and precipitation observations from 116 meteorological stations in central and south Asia. Averaged over all stations, the indices of temperature extremes indicate warming of both the cold tail and the warm tail of the distributions of daily minimum and maximum temperature between 1961 and 2000. For precipitation, most regional indices of wet extremes show little change in this period as a result of low spatial trend coherence with mixed positive and negative station trends. Relative to the changes in the total amounts, there is a slight indication of disproportionate changes in the precipitation extremes. Stations with near-complete data for the longer period of 19012000 suggest that the recent trends in extremes of minimum temperature are consistent with long-term trends, whereas the recent trends in extremes of maximum temperature are part of multidecadal climate variability. Keywords: Citedy By: 313 Solar assisted, pre-cooled hybrid desiccant cooling system forPakistan Author: A Khalid, M Mahmood,M Asif,T Muneer Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.34(1),2009--Pages151-157 Abstract: This work presents results of experimental and simulation study of a solar assisted pre-cooled hybrid desiccant cooling (PHDCS) system for air conditioning applications in Pakistan. Tests were conducted on a gas fired pre-cooled hybrid desiccant cooling test rig for high humidity Karachi weather. Using measured data sets from the test rig, validation of TRYNSIS model of the same cooling system was undertaken. Four modes or configurations of the cooling system were simulated for Karachi and Lahore climatic conditions. Lahore simulation results demonstrated that better COPp can be achieved using indirect evaporative cooler for pre-cooling and direct evaporative cooler for post-cooling of air. Life cycle assessment of solar air collector was performed and energy and environmental payback periods were found to be equal to 1 and 1.5 years, respectively. An economic assessment of the solar collector revealed a payback period of about 14 years. Keywords: Citedy By: 57 Modellingclimate changeimpacts and adaptation strategies for sunflower inPakistan Author: W Nasim, H Belhouchette,A Ahmad Journal: Outlook onAgricultur,Vol.45(1),2016--Pages Abstract: Climate change, food security, water scarcity and environmental sustainability have all become major global challenges. As a consequence, improving resource use efficiency is an important aspect of increasing crop productivity. Crop models are increasingly being used as tools for supporting strategic and tactical decision making under varying agro-climatic and socioeconomic conditions. These tools can also support climate change assessment and the evaluation of adaptation strategies to limit the adverse impacts of climate change. In this paper, the authors report on a case study conducted to assess the potential impact of climate change on grain yield in sunflower under arid, semi-arid and subhumid conditions in the Punjab region of Pakistan. Experimental data obtained between 2008 and 2009 were used for model evaluation. The study focused on the impacts of incremental temperature change on sunflower production. The modelling suggests that grain yield could reduce by up to 15% by the 2020s with an average increase in temperature of +1C, and by up to 25% if temperatures increased by up to 2C for the 2050s. Adaptation strategies showed that, if the crop were sown between 14 days (for 2020) and 21 days (for 2050) earlier than the current date (last week in February), yield losses could potentially be reduced. Keywords: agro-climatic zones,agro-meteorology,Helianthus annuus L,DSSAT crop model Citedy By: 10 Changing trends of thermal extremes inPakistan Author: M Zahid, G Rasul Journal: Climatic change,Vol.113(3-4),2012--Pages883-896 Abstract: Extreme events have gained considerable scientific attention recently due to their potentially catastrophic impacts. Heat waves are thought to be more pronounced now in most parts of the world, and especially in South Asia, but doubts remain. The aim of this study is to calculate the frequency and intensity of heat waves in South Asia, focusing on Pakistan and identifying the regions within Pakistan that are most vulnerable to heat waves. Analyses have been performed both at provincial and country levels from 1961 to 2009. The provincial level analysis shows positive trends for heat waves of magnitudes ?40C and ?45C for 5 and 7 consecutive days. Events of magnitude ?40C and ?45C for 10 consecutive days also increased in frequency in Punjab, Sindh, and Balochistan. These regions are therefore considered to be the regions most vulnerable to heat wave events in Pakistan. The Balochistan region shows a consistently increasing trend throughout the study period, which may lead to more frequent drought in the future. The country level analysis indicates an increase in the frequency of 5 and 7 consecutive days heat waves at all defined temperature thresholds. The 10-days heat waves spells show a slight increase at ?40C and no significant change at ?45C. The Gilgit Baltistan and Azad Jammu & Kashmir areas reported no events at ?45C for 5, 7 and 10 continuous days. It is anticipated that with a long term rise in temperatures around the globe, heat waves will become more frequent and intense in all parts of the world, including Pakistan. Keywords: Heat Wave,ENSO EventHeat, Summer Heat Wave,Severe Heat Wave Citedy By: 16 Stratigraphic response and mammalian dispersal during initial India-Asia collision: Evidence from the Ghazij Formation, Balochistan,Pakistan Author: WC Clyde, IH Khan,PD Gingerich Journal: Geology,Vol.31(12),2003--Pages1097-1100 Abstract: Initial continental collision between India and Asia is thought to have caused significant changes to global climate and biota, yet its timing and biogeographic consequences are uncertain. Structural and geophysical evidence indicates initial collision during the early Paleogene, but sedimentary evidence of this has been controversial owing to the intense deformation and metamorphism along the suture zone. Modern orders of mammals that appeared abruptly on northern continents coincident with the global warming event marking the Paleocene-Eocene boundary are hypothesized to have originated on the Indian subcontinent, but no relevant paleontological information has been available to test this idea. Here we present new paleomagnetic, sedimentologic, and paleontologic evidence to show that the lower Eocene Ghazij Formation of western Pakistan records continental sedimentation and mammalian dispersal associated with initial India-Asia collision. Our results are consistent with the initial collision occurring near the Paleocene-Eocene boundary, but modern orders of mammals appeared later in Indo-Pakistan and thus did not likely originate on the Indian subcontinent. Keywords: Citedy By: 66 Evaluation of wind power production prospective and Weibull parameter estimation methods for Babaurband, SindhPakistan Author: SF Khahro, K Tabbassum, AM Soomro, L Dong Journal: Energy conversion andManagement,Vol.78(),2014--Pages956-967 Abstract: Pakistan is currently experiencing an acute shortage of energy and urgently needs new sources of affordable energy that could alleviate the misery of the energy starved masses. At present the government is increasing not only the conventional energy sources like hydel and thermal but also focusing on the immense potential of renewable energy sources like; solar, wind, biogas, waste-to-energy etc. The recent economic crisis worldwide, global warming and climate change have also emphasized the need for utilizing economic feasible energy sources having lowest carbon emissions. Wind energy, with its sustainability and low environmental impact, is highly prominent. The aim of this paper is to explore the wind power production prospective of one of the sites in south region of Pakistan. It is worth mentioning here that this type of detailed analysis is hardly done for any location in Pakistan. Wind power densities and frequency distributions of wind speed at four different altitudes along with estimated wind power expected to be generated through commercial wind turbines is calculated. Analysis and comparison of 5 numerical methods is presented in this paper to determine the Weibull scale and shape parameters for the available wind data. The yearly mean wind speed of the considered site is 6.712 m/s and has power density of 310 W/m2 at 80 m height with high power density during April to August (highest in May with wind speed 9.595 m/s and power density 732 W/m2). Economic evaluation, to exemplify feasibility of installing wind turbines, is also done. The estimated cost of per kWh of electricity from wind is calculated as 0.0263 US$/kWh. Thus the candidate site is recommended for some small stand-alone systems as well as for wind farm. Keywords: Wind energy, Power density function, Weibull distribution, Frequency distribution Citedy By: 0 Techniques to implement in green data centres to achieve energy efficiency and reduceglobal warming effects Author: M Uddin,AA Rahman Journal: International Journal ofGlobal Warming,Vol.3(4),2011--Pages Abstract: Energy demand in data centre industry is growing rapidly as computing technology changes and Information Technology (IT) professionals seek to maximise performance of data centres. A multitude of methods have been used to estimate and quantify energy intensity. Rising energy costs, continuing concerns about global economic downturn and global warming effects has leaded ways for energy efficient data centres. The goal of computer system design has been shifted to power and energy efficiency. This paper highlights strategies and techniques that provide energy savings in data centre like reducing frequent hardware purchases, power/cooling cost reductions, green metrics, shrinking data storage, workload consolidation and reducing physical servers. Keywords: data centre, green IT, energy efficiency, global warming, virtualisation, metrics Citedy By: 28 South Asian monsoon climate change and radiocarbon in the Arabian Sea during early and middle Holocene Author: M Staubwasser, F Sirocko, PM Grootes Journal: Paleoceanography,Vol.17(4),--Pages Abstract: The 14C ages of planktonic foraminifers Globigerinoides sacculifer bracketing the Younger Dryas in a ?18O record of Globigerinoides ruber from a laminated sediment core on the Pakistani continental margin suggest that surface reservoir ages in the Arabian Sea were in excess of 1000 years during the deglaciation. A least squares error fit of a detailed 14C chronology to the (atmospheric) tree ring record gave variable early Holocene reservoir ages between 780 and 1120 years, well above the prebomb value of 640 years. Mid-Holocene reservoir ages are less well constrained but were probably closer to the prebomb value. The method used to fit individual core sections to the tree ring record was designed to require only a rough a priori estimate of the time spans, which in the core presented here were taken from each section's range of 14C ages. A significant 220-year quasi-oscillation was present in the ?18O record during the early Holocene but not thereafter. This frequency and amplitude pattern resembles an early Holocene 207- to 227-year oscillation previously observed in the atmospheric 14C record, which is generally interpreted as reflecting solar irradiance variability. An early Holocene climate event at 81508400 calendar years B.P. observed elsewhere within the Asian-East African monsoon system was again found in our record, suggesting a reduction in precipitation over NW India and Pakistan Keywords: Citedy By: 108 Snowfall less sensitive towarmingin Karakoram than in Himalayas due to a unique seasonal cycle Author: SBKapnick,TLDelworth,MAshfaq,SMalyshev Journal: Nature Geoscience ,Vol.7(),2014--Pages834-840 Abstract: The high mountains of Asia, including the Karakoram, Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau, combine to form a region of perplexing hydroclimate changes. Glaciers have exhibited mass stability or even expansion in the Karakoram region1,2,3, contrasting with glacial mass loss across the nearby Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau1,4, a pattern that has been termed the Karakoram anomaly. However, the remote location, complex terrain and multi-country fabric of high-mountain Asia have made it difficult to maintain longer-term monitoring systems of the meteorological components that may have influenced glacial change. Here we compare a set of high-resolution climate model simulations from 1861 to 2100 with the latest available observations to focus on the distinct seasonal cycles and resulting climate change signatures of Asias high-mountain ranges. We find that the Karakoram seasonal cycle is dominated by non-monsoonal winter precipitation, which uniquely protects it from reductions in annual snowfall under climate warming over the twenty-first century. The simulations show that climate change signals are detectable only with long and continuous records, and at specific elevations. Our findings suggest a meteorological mechanism for regional differences in the glacier response to climate warming. Keywords: Citedy By: 67 Suppression of south Asian summer monsoon precipitation in the 21st century Author: M Ashfaq, Y Shi,W Tung, RJ Trapp Journal: Geophysical Research Letters,Vol.36(1),2009--Pages Abstract: We used a high-resolution nested climate modeling system to investigate the response of South Asian summer monsoon dynamics to anthropogenic increases in greenhouse gas concentrations. The simulated dynamical features of the summer monsoon compared well with reanalysis data and observations. Further, we found that enhanced greenhouse forcing resulted in overall suppression of summer precipitation, a delay in monsoon onset, and an increase in the occurrence of monsoon break periods. Weakening of the large-scale monsoon flow and suppression of the dominant intraseasonal oscillatory modes were instrumental in the overall weakening of the South Asian summer monsoon. Such changes in monsoon dynamics could have substantial impacts by decreasing summer precipitation in key areas of South Asia Keywords: Citedy By: 185 The impact ofclimate changeon food crop productivity, food prices and food security in South Asia Author: JS Bandara,Y Cai Journal: Economic Analysis and Policy,Vol.44(4),2014--Pages451-465 Abstract: South Asia has been identified as one of the most vulnerable regions in the world to the impact of climate change. Empirical studies carried out in recent years using the partial equilibrium approach suggest that climate change-induced yield losses in agriculture are becoming a serious concern. In this study, we use a global dynamic computable general equilibrium model to examine the impact of changes in crop productivity due to climate change on food prices and food security in South Asia, focusing on five large countries in the region, namely, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. Our results suggest that there is likely to be a significant negative impact on food production and prices in all South Asian countries due to climate change-induced agricultural productivity changes. The results further suggest that countries in this region are likely to face problems of food security given that nearly half of the worlds poor reside in this region and agriculture plays an important role in the gross domestic product (GDP) and employment generation in the region. The results support the need for policy analysts and policy makers in the region to develop climate change adaptation measures that address the likely negative consequences of climate change-induced agricultural productivity losses. Keywords: Climate change, Food security, Computable general equilibrium Citedy By: 38 Sustainability of water resources management in the Indus Basin under changing climatic and socio economic conditions Author: DR Archer,N Forsythe,HJ Fowler Journal: Hydrology and Earth,Vol.14(8),2010--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is highly dependent on water resources originating in the mountain sources of the upper Indus for irrigated agriculture which is the mainstay of its economy. Hence any change in available resources through climate change or socio-economic factors could have a serious impact on food security and the environment. In terms of both ratio of withdrawals to runoff and per-capita water availability, Pakistan's water resources are already highly stressed and will become increasingly so with projected population changes. Potential changes to supply through declining reservoir storage, the impact of waterlogging and salinity or over-abstraction of groundwater, or reallocations for environmental remediation of the Indus Delta or to meet domestic demands, will reduce water availability for irrigation. The impact of climate change on resources in the Upper Indus is considered in terms of three hydrological regimes a nival regime dependent on melting of winter snow, a glacial regime, and a rainfall regime dependent on concurrent rainfall. On the basis of historic trends in climate, most notably the decline in summer temperatures, there is no strong evidence in favour of marked reductions in water resources from any of the three regimes. Evidence for changes in trans-Himalayan glacier mass balance is mixed. Sustainability of water resources appears more threatened by socio-economic changes than by climatic trends. Nevertheless, analysis and the understanding of the linkage of climate, glaciology and runoff is still far from complete; recent past climate experience may not provide a reliable guide to the future. Keywords: Citedy By: 100 Agricultural vulnerability and adaptation in developing countries: the Asia-Pacific region Author: Q Luo, E Lin Journal: Climatic Change,Vol.43(4),1999--Pages729-743 Abstract: During the last decades, a large number of climate change impact studies on agriculture have been conducted qualitatively and quantitatively in many regions of the Asia-Pacific. Changes in average climate conditions and climate variability will have a significant consequence on crop yields in many parts of the Asia-Pacific. Crop yield and productivity changes will vary considerably across the region. Vulnerability to climate change depends not only on physical and biological response but also on socioeconomic characteristics. Adaptation strategies that consider changes in crop varieties or in the timing of agricultural activities imply low costs and, if readily undertaken, can compensate for some of the yield loss simulated with the climate change scenarios. The studies reviewed here suggest that the regions of Tropical Asia appear to be among the more vulnerable; some areas of Temperate Asia also appear to be vulnerable. Keywords: Climate ChangeClimate ConditionCrop YieldClimate VariabilityAgricultural Activity Citedy By: 57 Conflicting signals of climatic change in the Upper Indus Basin Author: HJ Fowler, DR Archer Journal: Journal of Climate,Vol.19(),2006--Pages4276-4293 Abstract: Temperature data for seven instrumental records in the Karakoram and Hindu Kush Mountains of the Upper Indus Basin (UIB) have been analyzed for seasonal and annual trends over the period 19612000 and compared with neighboring mountain regions and the Indian subcontinent. Strong contrasts are found between the behavior of winter and summer temperatures and between maximum and minimum temperatures. Winter mean and maximum temperature show significant increases while mean and minimum summer temperatures show consistent decline. Increase in diurnal temperature range (DTR) is consistently observed in all seasons and the annual dataset, a pattern shared by much of the Indian subcontinent but in direct contrast to both GCM projections and the narrowing of DTR seen worldwide. This divergence commenced around the middle of the twentieth century and is thought to result from changes in large-scale circulation patterns and feedback processes associated with the Indian monsoon.The impact of observed seasonal temperature trend on runoff is explored using derived regression relationships. Decreases of ?20% in summer runoff in the rivers Hunza and Shyok are estimated to have resulted from the observed 1C fall in mean summer temperature since 1961, with even greater reductions in spring months. The observed downward trend in summer temperature and runoff is consistent with the observed thickening and expansion of Karakoram glaciers, in contrast to widespread decay and retreat in the eastern Himalayas. This suggests that the western Himalayas are showing a different response to global warming than other parts of the globe. Keywords: Citedy By: 309 Relationship between extreme temperature and electricity demand inPakistan Author: M Ali,MJ Iqbal, M Sharif Journal: International Journal of Energy andEnvironmental Engineering,Vol.4(36),2013--Pages Abstract: Nowadays, different sectors of the economy are being significantly affected by the weather vagaries. Electricity market is one of the most sensitive sectors, due to the fact that electricity demand is connected to the numerous climatic variables, especially the atmospheric temperature. In this paper we have deduced the link between electricity consumption and mean monthly maximum temperature index in Pakistan, as a case study. ARIMA time series forecast model is developed for the temperature index. The forecast values of mean monthly maximum temperature shows an increasing trend. Linear trend model for electricity consumption is also developed as a function of temperature. Electricity consumption reveals a significant trend due to increase in temperature and socio- economic factors. The monthly behavior of our forecast values depicts that the electricity consumption is more for summer season, and this demand will be highest (6785.6 GWh) in July 2020, due to rise in temperature. Forecast model reveals that the electricity consumption (EC) and mean monthly maximum temperature are increasing with the passage of time. Keywords: Maximum temperature index, Electricity consumption, Time series modelling, Forecast model Citedy By: 19 Greener energy: Issues and challenges forPakistanBiomass energy prospective Author: AW Bhutto,AA Bazmi,G Zahedi Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.15(6),2011--Pages3207-3219 Abstract: Diversification of fuel sources is imperative to address the energy security, climate change, and sustainable development issues; therefore, it is essential to address the energy crisis through the extensive utilization of abundant renewable energy resources, such as biomass energy, solar energy, wind energy and geothermal energy. Improving energy services for poor households in developing countries remains one of the most pressing challenges facing the development community. Earlier studies suggest in South Asia the households are likely to follow the energy ladder comprising fuels like dung, crop residue, firewood, kerosene, gobar gas, LPG, and electricity for cooking purposes. Evidence suggests that while it is possible to observe such transition in urban and semi-urban areas, the change is very slow in rural areas. In rural Pakistan, the access to commercial energy resources is limited, the majority of the households still heavily rely on traditional methods of using wood, animal waste and crop waste for domestic fuel needs. Efficiencies of use are very low and most of the potential is wasted because of non-scientific conventional technologies. Consequently there is an obligatory need to develop modern bio-energy technologies since renewable resources may serve to supplement the long-term energy needs of Pakistan to a significant level. Though the bio-resource base of Pakistan is substantial, its contribution to useful energy is low. In this paper we called attention to issues and challenges in biomass utilization for energy in Pakistan in context of sustainable development. This paper has identified areas in Pakistan where there is considerable scope to modernize biomass energy production delivery systems to provide varied energy carriers such as electricity, industrial and domestic fuel and gases. Barriers are examined over the whole biomass energy spectrum and policy issue and institutional roles and responsibilities are discussed. Keywords: Green energy, Biomass, Modern bioenergy, Sustainable development, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Statistical downscaling and future scenario generation of temperatures forPakistanRegion Author: DH Kazmi,J Li, G Rasul, J Tong, G Ali Journal: Theoretical and AppliedClimatology ,Vol.120(1-2),2015--Pages341-350 Abstract: Finer climate change information on spatial scale is required for impact studies than that presently provided by global or regional climate models. It is especially true for regions like South Asia with complex topography, coastal or island locations, and the areas of highly heterogeneous land-cover. To deal with the situation, an inexpensive method (statistical downscaling) has been adopted. Statistical DownScaling Model (SDSM) employed for downscaling of daily minimum and maximum temperature data of 44 national stations for base time (19611990) and then the future scenarios generated up to 2099. Observed as well as Predictors (product of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) data were calibrated and tested on individual/multiple basis through linear regression. Future scenario was generated based on HadCM3 daily data for A2 and B2 story lines. The downscaled data has been tested, and it has shown a relatively strong relationship with the observed in comparison to ECHAM5 data. Generally, the southern half of the country is considered vulnerable in terms of increasing temperatures, but the results of this study projects that in future, the northern belt in particular would have a possible threat of increasing tendency in air temperature. Especially, the northern areas (hosting the third largest ice reserves after the Polar Regions), an important feeding source for Indus River, are projected to be vulnerable in terms of increasing temperatures. Consequently, not only the hydro-agricultural sector but also the environmental conditions in the area may be at risk, in future. Keywords: Statistical Downscaling Climate Impact Study Scenario Family Maximum Temperature Data Decadal Anomaly Citedy By: 15 Projected climate change in the Hindu KushHimalayan region by using the high-resolution regional climate model PRECIS Author: A Kulkarni, S Patwardhan,KK Kumar, K Ashok Journal: Mountain Research and Development ,Vol.3(2),2013--Pages142-151 Abstract: The Hindu KushHimalayan (HKH) region is characterized by a variety of climatic conditions from tropical to alpine. It has been documented that the rates of warming in the HKH region are significantly higher than the global average and that the warming is occurring at much higher rates in the high-altitude regions than in the low-altitude regions. Mountainous environments are considered sensitive indicators of climate change. Hence this study examined the potential impact of global warming on the HKH region by applying Hadley Centre's high-resolution regional climate model PRECIS (Providing Regional Climates for Impact Studies) to 3 subregions: the western, central, and eastern Himalaya. The physical mechanisms that drive warming are different for the 3 regions, and the western Himalaya has 2 major rainy seasons, whereas the central and eastern Himalaya have only one. This study therefore focused on the common rainy season (JuneSeptember), during which all 3 regions receive the highest proportion of their annual rainfall. The 3 PRECIS simulations that correspond to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's A1B emissions scenario were carried out for a continuous period from 1961 to 2098. They were validated with high-resolution (0.25 latitude 0.25 longitude) data provided by the Asian PrecipitationHighly Resolved Observational Data Integration Towards Evaluation of the Water Resources (APHRODITE) project and by the US National Centers for Environmental Prediction and National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCEP/NCAR) reanalysis data. The model was reasonably effective in simulating the monsoon climate over the HKH region. The climate projections were examined over the short (20112040), medium (20412070), and long term (20712098). The model projections indicate that significant warming will occur throughout the HKH region toward the end of the 21st century. Summer monsoon precipitation is expected to be 2040% higher in 20712098 than it was in the baseline period (19611990). The 3 Quantifying Uncertainty in Model Predictions simulations show large differences in projections in the western Himalaya. Keywords: Climate change,monsoon,regional climate model simulated projections,Hindu KushHimalayas Citedy By: 51 Trend analysis of January temperature in Pakistan over the period of 1961-2006: Geographical Perspective Author: I Ahmad, S Zhaobo, D Weitao Journal: PakistanJournal ofMeteorology ,Vol.7(13),2010--Pages11-22 Abstract: Based on monthly data from 54 ground stations over the period of 1961 to 2006, the trend of January temperature has been analyzed in Pakistan and its different regions by statistical method. Tools of FORTRAN and GrADS have been used for computation and mapping. Like other subtropical regions of Asia, also January represents core monthof the winter season in Pakistan. Based on analysis, the January temperature has been increased by about 0.6oC at national level in the study period. However, this change in temperature varies from region to region and decade to decade in Pakistan. In order to know the regional detail of temperature tendency, schematically Pakistan is dividedinto five regions. The northern parts, southwestern parts comprised of Balochistan Plateau, the upper and lower Indus plains have the warming trend but surprisingly northwestern hilly areas of the study domain have cooling trend in January. Furthermore, the northern and western rugged territories of the country show larger interannual temperature variability in January than plains of the country. A cool phase in 1970s, warm phases in 1980s, 1990s and onward is obvious. The study put emphasis on the decadal and regional spatial distribution of temperature anomalies in the month of January. Keywords: January, warming trend, decadal variation, regional trend, spatial distribution, rugged Citedy By: 0 Recent water requirement of cotton crop inPakistan Author: G Naheed, G Rasul Journal: PakistanJournal of Meteorology,Vol.6(12),2010--Pages75-84 Abstract: Cotton is one of the foremost crops which are grown in the kharif season and it plays a very important role in Pakistans economy, around two third of the countrys export earnings are from the cotton. Like all crops, a cotton plant's water requirement vary by the age as well as the environment it grows in. The dryer and hotter the environment, the more water the plant requires. Cotton is very drought tolerant and uses about the same amount of water as other crops like millet and sorghum etc. Cotton is mainly grown in Punjab and Sindh as it likes hot and dry climate . FAO-modified Penmen Monteith method was used to estimate the water requirement of cotton crop by using the climatic data (1971-2000) of mean daily temperature, relative humidity, relative sunshine hours and wind speed of sixteen meteorological stations of Pakistan. Precipitation data was used to calculate the supplementary water requirement to compare the deficit .After analysis it was observed that only the upper parts of Punjab cotton may be sown under rainfed conditions but it is very rare in this area. In central Punjab, cotton may not be sown under rainfed conditions without supplementary irrigation in May. In southern Punjab and Sindh regions, cotton requires supplementary irrigation throughout its life cycle. Therefore, proper irrigation is required to fulfill the water needs of the cotton crop throughout its life cycle for successful growth. It has also been seen that water requirement has also increased in recent decades relative to the change occurred in climate .Water demand of the atmosphere which is closely related to the thermal regime has followed the warming trend of climate. Following the similar methods which were incorporated in the past, the recent requirement of water for Cotton will not only provide the quantitative assessment of irrigation water needs but also serve to take adaptation measures for coping the challenges of climate change ensuring sustainable crop production Keywords: Citedy By: 17 SPOT multispectral analysis for producing supraglacial debris load estimates for Batura glacier, Pakistan Author: MP Bishop,JF Shroder Jr, JL Ward Journal: Geocarto International,Vol.10(4),1995--Pages Abstract: SPOT multispectral and panchromatic data were evaluated to determine their utility to detect debris?load characteristics of the Batura Glacier located in the Karakoram Himalaya. Debris?depth measurements, surface samples, and ground photography were obtained and used with satellite?derived information to produce supraglacial debris?load and discharge estimates. Visual analysis of panchromatic data indicated that structural characteristics of the glacier exhibited unique textures associated with surface structure characteristics. Multispectral analysis revealed that stratified unsupervised classification of principal components can be used to produce classifications depicting supraglacial lithology and shallow debris?load variability. Debris?load discharge estimates ranged from 4897 x 103 m3 yr1. These results indicate that SPOT multispectral data may be used to produce reasonable quantitative estimates of debris?load characteristics for glacier mass balance and regional denudation studies Keywords: Citedy By: 52 Were the 2010 Pakistan floods predictable? Author: PJ Webster, VE Toma,HM Kim Journal: Geophysical Research Letters,Vol.38(4),2011--Pages Abstract: During July 2010, a series of monsoonal deluges over northern Pakistan resulted in catastrophic flooding, loss of life and property and an agricultural crisis that may last for years. Was the rainfall abnormal compared to previous years? Furthermore, could a high probability of flooding have been predicted? To address these questions, regional precipitation is analyzed using three dataset sets covering the 19812010 time period. It is concluded that the 2010 average May to August (MJJA) rainfall for year 2010 is somewhat greater in magnitude than previous years. However, the rainfall rate of the July deluges, especially in North Pakistan was exceptionally rare as deduced from limited data. The location of the deluges over the mountainous northern part of the country lead to the devastating floods. The European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) 15-day Ensemble Prediction System (EPS) is used to assess whether the rainfall over the flood affected region was predictable. A multi-year analysis shows that Pakistan rainfall is highly predictable out to 68 days including rainfall in the summer of 2010. We conclude that if these extended quantitative precipitation forecasts had been available in Pakistan; the high risk of flooding could have been foreseen. If these rainfall forecasts had been coupled to a hydrological model then the high risk of extensive and prolonged flooding could have anticipated and actions taken to mitigate their impact. Keywords: Citedy By: 163 On the widespread winter fog in northeasternPakistanand India Author: S Hameed, MI Mirza, BM Ghauri Journal: Geophysical Research Letters,Vol.27(13),2000--Pages1891-1894 Abstract: During the last two winters widespread fog frequently occurred in northeastern India and Pakistan, in a region extending over 1500 km. A particularly severe fog episode lasted from mid-December, 1998 to early January, 1999. The fog caused extensive economic damage and disruptions in transport. We determined concentrations of SO42?, NO3?, and selected trace elements at Lahore, Pakistan during and after the fog event by collecting aerosols on Whatman 41 filters every 12 h. SO42? concentrations of up to 100 g/m were observed during fog. The SO42?/Se ratios and trace element data suggest a distant source of SO42? aerosols, hundreds of kms away. Lahore was downwind of coal-burning in India during the fog. The high concentrations of SO42? observed suggest a more extensive investigation of the chemistry and transport processes in this region is necessary to delineate emission sources and develop control strategies as there are serious likely effects on human health and economy in a region populated by hundreds of millions of people, and on global climate change through direct and indirect forcing. Keywords: Citedy By: 40 No sign yet of Himalayan meltdown, Indian report finds Author: P Bagla Journal: Science ,Vol.326(5955),2011--Pages924-925 Abstract: Are Himalayan glaciers beating a rapid retreat in the face of global warming? That would seem to be the case, according to a flurry of recent reports by BBC and other mass media. But the picture is more complexand poses scientific puzzles, according to a review of satellite and ground measurements released by India's Ministry of Environment and Forests earlier this week. The report, by senior glaciologist Vijay Kumar Raina, formerly of the Geological Survey of India, seeks to correct a widely held misimpression based on measurements of a handful of glaciers: that India's 10,000 or so Himalayan glaciers are shrinking rapidly in response to climate change. That's not so, Raina says. Keywords: Citedy By: 56 Investigation of rainfall variability forPakistan Author: G Naheed, G Rasul Journal: PakistanJournal of Meteorology,Vol.7(14),2011--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is an agricultural country mainly dependant on irrigation through the Indus water system. The country has developed the worlds largest contagious canal network. Monsoon precipitation is the lifeline of Pakistan which not only caters the national power supply and standing crops water demands but help gathers the reserves to meet the requirements of low flow period in the next 4-5 months. Future projection of weather indicates towards the dry land agriculture for Pakistan. The purpose of the present study was to investigate and analyze the variability in precipitation occurred in the past times. Rainfall variability coefficient is utilized to analyze the past time situation and the study covers the period from 1960-2009. The results of the decadal analysis showed that the high value of the variability coefficient has been observed in Balochistan (251%), Sindh (247%) and Punjab (208%) regions. However the annual analysis showed the increasing trend of variability coefficient from North to South in Pakistan. According to the inter seasonal analysis of fifty years data (1960-09) variation in the coefficient of variability was highest in post monsoon and pre monsoon seasons as compared to the winter and monsoon seasons. These analysis showed that forecasting is a challenging job for the forecasters where the variability is prominently high. It revealed in the study that most of the northern areas have safeguarded except in the post monsoon period. While the southern half has been suffered throughout the year in terms of rainfall variability Keywords: Citedy By: 11 Uncertainties in the regional climate models simulations of South-Asian summer monsoon andclimate change Author: FS Syed,W Iqbal, AAB Syed, G Rasul Journal: Climate dynamics,Vol.42(7-8),2014--Pages2079-2097 Abstract: The uncertainties in the regional climate models (RCMs) are evaluated by analyzing the driving global data of ERA40 reanalysis and ECHAM5 general circulation models, and the downscaled data of two RCMs (RegCM4 and PRECIS) over South-Asia for the present day simulation (19712000) of South-Asian summer monsoon. The differences between the observational datasets over South-Asia are also analyzed. The spatial and the quantitative analysis over the selected climatic regions of South-Asia for the mean climate and the inter-annual variability of temperature, precipitation and circulation show that the RCMs have systematic biases which are independent from different driving datasets and seems to come from the physics parameterization of the RCMs. The spatial gradients and topographically-induced structure of climate are generally captured and simulated values are within a few degrees of the observed values. The biases in the RCMs are not consistent with the biases in the driving fields and the models show similar spatial patterns after downscaling different global datasets. The annual cycle of temperature and rainfall is well simulated by the RCMs, however the RCMs are not able to capture the inter-annual variability. ECHAM5 is also downscaled for the future (20712100) climate under A1B emission scenario. The climate change signal is consistent between ECHAM5 and RCMs. There is warming over all the regions of South-Asia associated with increasing greenhouse gas concentrations and the increase in summer mean surface air temperature by the end of the century ranges from 2.5 to 5 C, with maximum warming over north western parts of the domain and 30 % increase in rainfall over north eastern India, Bangladesh and Myanmar. Keywords: Regional climate modelRegCM4PRECISSouth-AsiaMonsoonClimate changeUncertainty Citedy By: 31 Emerging meta-organisations and adaptation toglobal climate change: Evidence from implementing adaptation in Nepal,Pakistanand Ghana Author: AS Chaudhury,MJ Ventresca, TF Thornton Journal: GlobalEnvironmentalChange Volume 38,Vol.38(),2016--Pages243-257 Abstract: As developing countries move from policy to implementing adaptation to climate change, formal operational structures are emerging that exceed the expertise of any one actor. We refer to these arrangements as meta-organisations that comprise many autonomous component organisations tackling adaptation. The meta-organisations set standards, define purposes, and specify appropriate means-ends criteria for delivering adaptation. Using empirical data from the three cases, Nepal, Pakistan and Ghana, the study identifies and analyses six attributes of the meta and component organisational structures. We argue that organisational structures are crucial to understanding adaptation, specifying policy and implementation. Our analysis demonstrates that while each country promotes similar objectives, the emerging structures are quite distinct, shaped by country-specific attributes and issues that lead to different outcomes. Nepals priority for a formal process has come at the cost of delayed implementation. Pakistans devolved approach lacks legitimacy to scale up the process nationally. Ghanas use of existing decentralised structures and budgets relegates adaptation below other development priorities. These divergent structures arise from the different needs for legitimacy and accountability, and the relative priority attached to adaptation against other needs. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Consistency of local perceptions ofclimate changein the Kangchenjunga Himalaya landscape Author: P Chaudhary, S Rai, S Wangdi, A Mao, N Rehman Journal: Current Science,Vol.101(4),2011--Pages504-513 Abstract: The Himalaya is experiencing rapid climate change that is likely to significantly impact local ecosystems, biodiversity, agriculture and human well-being. However, the scientific community has been slow to examine the extent and consequences of climate change. Local communities have been coping with environmental change since millennia. Thus they often have considerable knowledge about environmental change and means to cope with its consequences. We (a) examined the perceptions of local communities about climate change and its impacts on ecosystems, biodiversity, agriculture and livelihoods in the Kangchenjunga Himalayas region; (b) analysed the consistency of perceptions across geographical regions, and (c) assessed the conformity between local perceptions and scientific evidence. Our study is based on surveys conducted in 576 households, focus group discussions, key informant surveys and direct observations. The results show that people in the Kangchenjunga Himalayas region have considerable knowledge of climate change and its effects on the weather, ecosystems, biodiversity and agriculture. These perceptions are consistent across the region and conform to scientific findings. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 The challenge of climate change and policy response in Pakistan Author: MA Khan,JA Khan, Z Ali, I Ahmad Journal: Environmental Earth Sciences,Vol.(),2016--Pages Abstract: Climate change is expected to have adverse impact on Pakistan. This is ironical for a country, which ranks 135th in the world in terms of global green house gases (GHG) emissions per capita, but ranks 16th in terms of vulnerability to climate change. Climate change poses a major threat to all dimensions of sustainable development and has widespread impacts across various sectors and ecosystems such as food, water and energy; forests and biodiversity; coastal and marine environment; as well as on the occurrence and intensity of climate related hazards such as floods and drought. It also carries potential for internal and external conflicts. The paper examines the present and potential impact of climate change in Pakistan, and reviews national policies and plans to examine the extent to which climate-related issues have been integrated within these. The paper also discusses adaptation and mitigation measures and identifies the key elements that need to be included in the Climate Change Action Plan of Pakistan and stresses their mainstreaming into the national development policies and plans. Keywords: VulnerabilityHazardsImpactsClimate change policyMainstreamingDevelopment plans Citedy By: 0 Analysing the Impact ofClimate Changeon Rice Productivity inPakistan Author: M Ahmad, M Nawaz,M Iqbal,S Javed Journal: MPRA PAPER,Vol.(),2014--Pages Abstract: This study, applying Fixed Effect Model (FEM), analyses the impact of climate change on yield of fine and coarse rice in Pakistan using district-level panel data for the period of 19872010. The evidence suggests that climate change significantly affects yield of both types of rice crops. The impact varies across different phenological stages of the crop in magnitude as well as direction. Precipitation forms a statistically significant non-linear relationship with yield for both types of rice. No evidence, however, was found for presence of non-linear temperature effects. Additionally, fertilizer use plays a significant role in enhancing yield in case of Basmati rice only. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Potentials of hydrogen and nuclear towardsglobal warmingmitigationexpansion of an integrated assessment model MARIA and simulations Author: S Mori, T Saito Journal: Energy Economics,Vol.26(4),2004--Pages565-578 Abstract: This paper describes an extended version of an integrated assessment model called Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation (MARIA) and how it was applied to assess the global and regional greenhouse gas (GHG) emission mitigation policies. The model has been developed to assess the potential contribution of fossil, biomass, nuclear and other energy technologies and land-use changes to future GHG emissions. In this paper, the MARIA model is extended to evaluate a new hydrogen production process through steammethane reforming at a significantly lower temperature (300500 C) than that of conventional steammethane reforming processes as a liquid fuel supplier under the long-term global warming strategies. Bern simple carbon cycle model is also included in the model to reflect the recent findings in climate science. The simulation results suggest that hydrogen with Fast Breeder Reactors could supply 58 GTOE of hydrogen in the second half of the 21st century when climate policy that stabilizes the atmospheric carbon concentration is introduced. Although biomass does not completely replace fossil energy sources, the simulations show that it effectively mitigates the marginal cost of carbon emission Keywords: Integrated assessment model, Climate change, Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions Citedy By: 0 The impact ofclimate changeon agriculture in Asia Author: R Mendelsohn Journal: Journal of Integrative Agriculture,Vol.13(4),2014--Pages660-665 Abstract: Asian agriculture is responsible for two thirds of global agricultural GDP. There have been numerous studies exploring the impact of climate change on crops in specific locations in Asia but no study has yet analyzed crops across the entire continent. This study relies on a Ricardian study of China that estimated climate coefficients for Chinese crops. These coefficients are then used to interpolate potential climate damages across the continent. With carbon fertilization, the model predicts small aggregate effects with a 1.5C warming but damages of about US$84 billion with 3C warming. India is predicted to be especially vulnerable. Keywords: agriculture, climate change, Asia, Ricardian Citedy By: 29 Twenty first century climatic and hydrological changes over Upper Indus Basin of Himalayan region ofPakistan Author: S Ali, D Li, F Congbin,F Khan Journal: Environmental Research Letters,Vol.(),2015--Pages Abstract: This study is based on both the recent and the predicted twenty first century climatic and hydrological changes over the mountainous Upper Indus Basin (UIB), which are influenced by snow and glacier melting. Conformal-Cubic Atmospheric Model (CCAM) data for the periods 19762005, 20062035, 20412070, and 20712100 with RCP4.5 and RCP8.5; and Regional Climate Model (RegCM) data for the periods of 20412050 and 20712080 with RCP8.5 are used for climatic projection and, after bias correction, the same data are used as an input to the University of British Columbia (UBC) hydrological model for river flow projections. The projections of all of the future periods were compared with the results of 19762005 and with each other. Projections of future changes show a consistent increase in air temperature and precipitation. However, temperature and precipitation increase is relatively slow during 20712100 in contrast with 20412070. Northern parts are more likely to experience an increase in precipitation and temperature in comparison to the southern parts. A higher increase in temperature is projected during spring and winter over southern parts and during summer over northern parts. Moreover, the increase in minimum temperature is larger in both scenarios for all future periods. Future river flow is projected by both models to increase in the twenty first century (CCAM and RegCM) in both scenarios. However, the rate of increase is larger during the first half while it is relatively small in the second half of the twenty first century in RCP4.5. The possible reason for high river flow during the first half of the twenty first century is the large increase in temperature, which may cause faster melting of snow, while in the last half of the century there is a decreasing trend in river flow, precipitation, and temperature (20712100) in comparison to 20412070 for RCP4.5. Generally, for all future periods, the percentage of increased river flow is larger in winter than in summer, while quantitatively large river flow was projected, particularly during the summer monsoon. Due to high river flow and increase in precipitation in UIB, water availability is likely to be increased in the twenty first century and this may sustain water demands. Keywords: Citedy By: 18 Greenhouse gas emissions from agro-ecosystems and their contribution to environmental change in the Indus Basin ofPakistan Author: MM Iqbal, MA Goheer Journal: Advances in Atmospheric Sciences,Vol.(),2008--Pages Abstract: There is growing concern that increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have been responsible for global warming through their effect on radiation balance and temperature. The magnitude of emissions and the relative importance of different sources vary widely, regionally and locally. The Indus Basin of Pakistan is the food basket of the country and agricultural activities are vulnerable to the effects of global warming due to accelerated emissions of GHGs. Many developments have taken place in the agricultural sector of Pakistan in recent decades in the background of the changing role of the government and the encouragement of the private sector for investment in new ventures. These interventions have considerable GHG emission potential. Unfortunately, no published information is currently available on GHG concentrations in the Indus Basin to assess their magnitude and emission trends. The present study is an attempt to estimate GHG (CO2, CH4and N2O) emissions arising from different agro-ecosystems of Indus Basin. The GHGs were estimated mostly using the IPCC Guidelines and data from the published literature. The results showed that CH4emissions were the highest (4.126 Tg yr?1) followed by N2O (0.265 Tg yr?1) and CO2(52.6 Tg yr?1). The sources of CH4are enteric fermentation, rice cultivation and cultivation of other crops. N2O is formed by microbial denitrification of NO3produced from applied fertilizer-N on cropped soils or by mineralization of native organic matter on fallow soils. CO2is formed by the burning of plant residue and by soil respiration due to the decomposition of soil organic matter. Keywords: greenhouse gasesagricultureIndus BasinPakistan Citedy By: 12 Emerging diseases and ecosystem instability: new threats to public health. Author: PR Epstein Journal: American journal of public health,Vol.85(2),1995--Pages168-172 Abstract: Ecologists have begun to describe an environmental distress syndrome, whereby widespread loss of top predators and harsh environmental conditions are encouraging the selection of opportunistic pests and pathogens across a wide taxonomic range of plants and animals. Environmental change and pollutants stress individuals and populations, and this may be reflected in the global resurgence of infectious disease as these stresses cascade through the community assemblages of species. In 1993, the sudden appearance of a virulent, rodent-borne hantavirus in the arid US Southwest accompanied anomalous weather patterns, and a novel Vibrio cholerae variant (O139 Bengal) emerged in Asia where marine ecosystems are experiencing a pandemic of coastal algal blooms, apparently harboring and amplifying the agent. This paper suggests a framework for integrating the surveillance of health outcomes and key reservoir and vector species, with ecological and climatic monitoring. Keywords: Citedy By: 221 Climate changeand the potentialglobaldistribution of Aedes aegypti: spatial modelling using GIS and CLIMEX Author: HM Khormi,L Kumar Journal: Geospatial health, ,Vol.8(2),2014--Pages405-415 Abstract: We examined the potential added risk posed by global climate change on the dengue vector Aedes aegypti abundance using CLIMEX, a powerful tool for exploring the relationship between the fundamental and realised niche of any species. After calibrating the model using data from several knowledge domains, including geographical distribution records, we estimated potential distributions of the mosquito under current and future potential scenarios. The impact of climate change on its potential distribution was assessed with two global climate models, the CSIRO-Mk3.0 and the MIROC-H, run with two potential, future emission scenarios (A1B and A2) published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. We compared todays climate situation with two arbitrarily chosen future time points (2030 and 2070) to see the impact on the worldwide distribution of A. aegypti. The model for the current global climate indicated favourable areas for the mosquito within its known distribution in tropical and subtropical areas. However, even if much of the tropics and subtropics will continue to be suitable, the climatically favourable areas for A. aegypti globally are projected to contract under the future scenarios produced by these models, while currently unfavourable areas, such as inland Australia, the Arabian Peninsula, southern Iran and some parts of North America may become climatically favourable for this mosquito species. The climate models for the Aedes dengue vector presented here should be useful for management purposes as they can be adapted for decision/making regarding allocation of resources for dengue risk toward areas where risk infection remains and away from areas where climatic suitability is likely to decrease in the future. Keywords: Aedes aegypti, climate change, CLIMEX, dengue, geographical information system, infection Citedy By: 43 Analysis of a historical (19812010) temperature record of the Punjab province ofPakistan Author: F Abbas Journal: Earth Interactions,Vol.17(15),2013--Pages Abstract: Prolonged droughts and uneven monsoons have adversely affected socioeconomic and environmental conditions of Pakistan, especially of the Punjab province. Analysis of historical (19812010) daily minimum and maximum temperatures from five cities in semiarid Punjab, Pakistan, was carried out to evaluate spatial and temporal patterns in thermal regimes. A total of 13 climate change indices were calculated using daily minimum and maximum temperatures and analyzed for trend using RClimDex, a program written in the statistical software package R. A nonparametric MannKendall test and Sen's slope estimates were used to determine the statistical significance and magnitude of a trend, respectively. Observed trends in selected indices during 19812010 suggest an overall warming in the region. Over the analysis period, the regionally averaged occurrence of extreme cold (10th percentile) nights and days has decreased by ?3.94 nights per decade and ?0.61 days per decade, respectively. Occurrence of extreme hot (90th percentile) nights and days has increased by 4.19 nights per decade and 0.92 days per decade, respectively. The number of summer days has increased by almost 3 days per decade on average at four out of the five cities. Multan was the only city where the number of summer days has declined by 5 days per decade. Regionally averaged increase in tropical nights was 8.35 nights per decade. Regional warming will dictate increased crop water requirements in this semiarid region agriculture, which is already under water-scarce conditions, especially in the Faisalabad district, where saline groundwater is not suitable for crops. Keywords: Punjab; Pakistan; RClimDex; Regional warming; Semiarid; Temperature indices Citedy By: 15 A study of aerosol properties over Lahore (Pakistan) by using AERONET data Author: M Ali,S Tariq, K Mahmood, A Daud, A Batool Journal: Asia-Pacific Journal of Atmospheric Sciences,Vol.50(2),2014--Pages153-162 Abstract: It is well established that aerosols affect the climate in a variety of ways. In order to understand these effects, we require an insight into the properties of aerosols. In this paper we present a study of aerosol properties such as aerosol optical depth (AOD), single scattering albedo (SSA) and aerosol radiative forcing (ARF) over mega city of Lahore (Pakistan). The data from Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) have been used for the period December 2009 to October 2011. The seasonal average values of AOD, asymmetry parameter (ASY) and volume size distribution in coarse mode were observed to be highest in summer. On the other hand, the average values of Angstrom exponent (AE) and imaginary part of refractive index (RI) were found to be maximum in winter. The average value of real part of RI was found to be higher in spring than in all other seasons. The SSA exhibited an increasing trend with wavelength in the range 440 nm1020 nm in spring, summer and fall indicating the dominance of coarse particles (usually dust). However, a decreasing trend was found in winter in the range 675 nm1020 nm pointing towards the dominance of biomass and urban/industrial aerosols. As far as aerosol radiative forcing (ARF) is concerned, we have found that during the spring season ARF was lowest at the surface of Earth and highest at top of the atmosphere (TOA). This indicates that the atmosphere was warmer in spring than in all the remaining seasons Keywords: Aeronetaerosol propertiesLahore Citedy By: 27 The relationship between carbon dioxide emissions, energy consumption, and GDP: A recent evidence from Pakistan Author: O Mohiuddin, S Asumadu-Sarkodie Journal: Cogent,Vol.3(1),2016--Pages Abstract: In this study an attempt was made to investigate carbon dioxide emissions, energy consumption (EC), GDP, and electricity production from oil, coal and natural gas, recent evidence from Pakistan by employing a time series data spanning from 1971 to 2013. The study employed the vector error correction model to estimate the long-run equilibrium relationship. There was evidence of long-run equilibrium relationship running from EC, electricity production from coal, electricity production from natural gas, electricity production from oil and GDP to carbon dioxide emissions. The policy implication of the VEC model means that a 1% increase in energy production from oil in Pakistan will increase carbon dioxide emissions by 13.7% in the long-run. There was evidence of a unidirectional causality running from EC to carbon dioxide emissions, electricity production from natural gas to EC, EC to electricity production from oil, electricity production from natural gas to GDP and GDP to electricity production from oil. Evidence from the generalized impulse-response analysis shows that three components contribute to carbon dioxide emissions in Pakistan, which include EC, energy production from gas and GDP. Keywords: carbon dioxide emission,energy consumption,economic Citedy By: 18 The Environment and Climate Change Outlook of Pakistan Author: Journal: UNEP & GOP,Vol.(),2013--Pages Abstract: The Environment and Climate Change Outlook of Pakistan is a review of the environmental conditions, the impacts of climate change and the status of national response to the changing situation in the country. Its objective is to provide a general evaluation of the quality of environment and emerging sustainable development trends in the country. While providing data and information on environmental conditions and trends and emerging problems, particularly climate change, the document also analyses critically the policy response to these issues in the country. It also illustrates successful initiatives and best practices, some of which may be replicated. Finally, the report identifies key challenges and areas in which urgent action is needed. The principal challenge identified is to promote growth in the country while safeguarding natural resources, promoting eco-efficiency, and enhancing public participation while empowering communities to become custodians of the environment. It also notes that although Pakistan contributes very little to GHG emissions, yet the country faces the worst environmental challenge in the form of climate change and dealing with it is no longer an option for the country; it has become an unavoidable reality in the wake of increasing symptoms exhibited through cataclysmic floods and droughts. The potential impacts of climate change identified are wide-ranging and are likely to affect all dimensions of development with impacts across many sectors and ecosystems. This report has two sections. The first section is the Executive Summary while the second is the main report. The main report has been divided into four related parts. The content of each of these parts is summarized as follows: Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Part Four comprises two chapters Policy Response and Challenges and Outlook. The first highlights? the response to the problems of environment by various actors including the government Author: industry and private sector as well as NGOs. The next chapter examines projected trends for the environment Journal: and discusses the future challenges and outlook of environment and climate change in the country.,Vol.(),--Pages Abstract: Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Technical Report on Karachi Heat wave June 2015 Author: Dr. Qamar uz Zaman Chaudhry, Dr. Ghulam Rasul, Ahmad Kamal, Munir Ahmad Mangrio and Shahbaz Mahmood Journal: Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Climate Change,Vol.(),2015--Pages Abstract: Heat-wave is a prevalent climate related natural hazard. Heat-waves are understood as unusual period of hot and humid or hot and dry conditions which prevail from three to five days during a summer season. There is no universally accepted definition of heat-wave phenomenon; however, for this report we refer to the World Meteorological Organizations (WMO) definition which states that a heat-wave occurs when the daily maximum temperature of more than five consecutive days exceeds the average maximum temperature by 5 C. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Improved hydrological projections and reservoir management in the Upper Indus Basin under the changing climate: Author: Khan, F., Pilz, J., & Shaukat Ali. Journal: Water and Environment Journal,Vol.31(2),2017--Pages235-244 Abstract: The availability of water resources plays an important role for the economy of a country. The nexus of Energy-Food-Water are interlinked and of particular importance in the uncertain environment of developing countries. In Pakistan, agriculture contributes 25 percent to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The Indus River contributes 44 percent of the available water to irrigation of crops and the ecosystem, and currently produces 5,112 Megawatt (MW) electricity, with a potential to produce 38,602 MW electricity. This makes it important to investigate the status of water availability in the Upper Indus Basin (UIB) under existing emission scenarios. In this study, the future availability of water is projected for the Indus River under the A2, B2, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 emission scenarios. A meta-analysis has been conducted to present a combined picture by combining the results from the emission scenarios. Our meta-analysis shows higher con?dence in RCPs projections. The results show that su?cient water will be available in the Indus River that will meet the demands of water in future but there will be scarcity of water in some months under each scenario. However, by proper management and optimum utilization of the available water, this scarcity can be resolved. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Pakistans Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (Pak-Indc) Author: Journal: Govt. of Pakistan,Vol.(),2016--Pages Abstract: Pakistan reiterates its commitment and obligations towards the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and Paris Agreement, and the objective to limit the average global temperature increase to 1.5 to 2.0 degrees Centigrade. It will continue to play a meaningful role in global efforts towards achieving this goal. As explained in the Pak-INDC, a number of mitigation and adaptation measures and actions are already being undertaken with domestic resources. These measures and actions can be intensified in coming years with expected availability of international climate finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity building. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Technology Needs Assessment for Climate Change Adaptation Barrier Analysis and Enabling Framework Author: Dr. Qamar uz Zaman Chaudhry, : Muhammed Irfan Tariq, Journal: Govt. of Pakistan,Vol.(),2016--Pages Abstract: Climate change is one of the most daunting threats that humankind faces today. For Pakistan, it is a colossal challenge to achieve its sustainable development goals without compromising on its socio-economic development needs. Due to its exposure to the recurrent episodes of drought, flooding, heatwaves, and glacial lake outburst floods in the past few decades, the country is consistently ranked by multiple climate change vulnerability indices as being one of the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Building resilience and adaptation to climate change is becoming indispensible for Pakistan. Fortunately, environmentally sound technologies are gaining a high priority in sustainable development policy dialogue and implementing frameworks. Technology Needs Assessment (TNA) is one of the critical steps towards identifying and assessing climate change adaptation challenges for Pakistan in order to align its adaptation needs and opportunities with goals and objectives of its sustainable development. As a climate change adaptation tool this TNA would help the country identify the needs for new equipment, techniques, practical knowledge and skills, which are necessary to successfully pursue climate resilient development. This report on Barrier Analysis & Enabling Framework of technology needs assessment is the part of TNA project outputs, funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and implemented by the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) and the UNEP DTU Partnership in collaboration with Asian Institute of Technology (AIT). The TNA process in Pakistan is being undertaken since June 2015, with the Ministry of Climate Change in lead. This report identifies and provides a list of barriers and enabling measures for adoption of prioritized adaptation technologies in climate vulnerable water and agriculture sectors of Pakistan. The report is the result of a fully country driven, participatory process. Views and information in this report is the product of extensive discussions with technology expert team and stakeholders. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Prediction of summer rainfall in Pakistan from global sea surface temperature and sea level pressure: Author: Adnan, M., Rehman, N., Shaukat Ali, Mehmood, S., Mir, K. A., Khan, A. A., & Khalid, B. Journal: Weather,Vol.72(3),2017--Pages76-84 Abstract: Agriculture contributes around a quarter to Pakistan's economy and is closely linked with the variability of monsoon rainfall. The prediction of monsoon rains with sufficient lead time has immense importance for the planning and management of water resources and agriculture. In this study, Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) and Principal Component Regression (PCR) methods are employed to predict monsoon rainfall, and their performances are compared for JuneSeptember (JJAS) for the period 19612014 over the monsoon region of Pakistan. Rainfall data of Meteorological stations are used as the predictand. In the MLR method, predictors are carried out from sea level pressure (SLP) and sea surface temperature (SST) of the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) reanalysis datasets. The PCR method first calculates principal components (PCs) from SLP and SST data, and these PCs are then combined with the regression technique and used as predictors. The performance of both models is tested using statistical measures such as root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), bias and the correlation coefficient to evaluate the skill of the forecast. The agreement between actual and predicted rainfall data provides evidence for reasonably accurate predictions from both methods. The MLR and PCR models explained 84.6 and 92.2% of the variation of data, and the multiple correlation coefficients are 0.92 and 0.96 respectively. The correlation coefficient for the verification period (20052014) is 0.73 for MLR and 0.89 for PCR. The values of mean bias, MAE and RMSE are ?5.5, 20.0 and 25.1mm for MLR, and ?0.42, 16.2 and 16.6mm for PCR, respectively. The results indicate that the PCR model forecast is slightly better than that of the MLR model. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Analysis of baseline and alternative air quality scenarios for Pakistan: an integrated approach Author: Kaleem Anwar Mir, Pallav Purohit, Gary A. Goldstein, and Rajasekhar Balasubramanian. Journal: Environmental Science and Pollution ,Vol.(),2016--Pages Abstract: This study aims to assess the current and future air pollution and associated health impacts in Pakistan. In this study, the Pakistan Integrated Energy Model (Pak-IEM) is used to assess current and future energy consumption in Pakistan. To assess air pollution levels and associated health impacts, we used the Greenhouse gas and Air pollution INteractions and Synergies (GAINS) model. A linkage has been established between both the models to feed the energy outputs from Pak-IEM into GAINS for exploring different scenarios. Mainly, the emissions of three air pollutants (SO2, NOx, and PM2.5) as well as the associated health impacts of increased emissions are assessed. Baseline emission scenario (BES) shows a growth in emissions of SO2, NOx, and PM2.5 by a factor of 2.4, 2.2, and 2.5 between 2007 and 2030. In terms of health impacts, by 2030, annual mean concentrations of fine particles (PM2.5) would increase to more than 150 ?g/m3 in some parts of Punjab region of Pakistan, for which loss in statistical life expectancy is calculated to increase from 30 to 60 months in 2007 up to 60-100 months in 2030 on average. Keywords: Abatement policies; Air pollution; Health impact; Scenario analysis Citedy By: 0 Twenty first century climatic and hydrological changes over Upper Indus Basin of Himalayan region of Pakistan, Author: Shaukat Ali, Dan Li, Fu Congbin and Firdos Khan, Journal: Environmental Research Letters,Vol.10(1),2015--Pages Abstract: This study is based on both the recent and the predicted twenty first century climatic and hydrological changes over the mountainous Upper Indus Basin (UIB), which are influenced by snow and glacier melting. Conformal-Cubic Atmospheric Model (CCAM) data for the periods 19762005, 20062035, 20412070, and 20712100 with RCP4.5 and RCP8.5; and Regional Climate Model (RegCM) data for the periods of 20412050 and 20712080 with RCP8.5 are used for climatic projection and, after bias correction, the same data are used as an input to the University of British Columbia (UBC) hydrological model for river flow projections. The projections of all of the future periods were compared with the results of 19762005 and with each other. Projections of future changes show a consistent increase in air temperature and precipitation. However, temperature and precipitation increase is relatively slow during 20712100 in contrast with 20412070. Northern parts are more likely to experience an increase in precipitation and temperature in comparison to the southern parts. A higher increase in temperature is projected during spring and winter over southern parts and during summer over northern parts. Moreover, the increase in minimum temperature is larger in both scenarios for all future periods. Future river flow is projected by both models to increase in the twenty first century (CCAM and RegCM) in both scenarios. However, the rate of increase is larger during the first half while it is relatively small in the second half of the twenty first century in RCP4.5. The possible reason for high river flow during the first half of the twenty first century is the large increase in temperature, which may cause faster melting of snow, while in the last half of the century there is a decreasing trend in river flow, precipitation, and temperature (20712100) in comparison to 20412070 for RCP4.5. Generally, for all future periods, the percentage of increased river flow is larger in winter than in summer, while quantitatively large river flow was projected, particularly during the summer monsoon. Due to high river flow and increase in precipitation in UIB, water availability is likely to be increased in the twenty first century and this may sustain water demands. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Performance of convective parameterization schemes in Asia using RegCM: Simulations in three typical regions for the period 1998-2002 Author: Shaukat Ali, Dan Li, Fu Congbin and Yang Yang, Journal: Advances in Atmospheric Sciences,Vol.32(5),2015--Pages715-730 Abstract: This study discusses the sensitivity of convective parameterization schemes (CPSs) in the Regional Climate Model (version 4.3) (RegCM4.3) over East/South Asia. The simulations using different CPSs in RegCM are compared to discover a suitable scheme for this region, as the performance of different schemes is greatly influenced by region and seasonality. Over Southeast China and the Bay of Bengal, the Grell scheme exhibits the lowest RMSEs of summer precipitation compared to observed data. Moreover, the Emanuel over land and Grell over ocean (ELGO) scheme enhances the simulation, in comparison with any single CPS (Grell/Emanuel) over Western Ghats, Sri Lanka, and Southeast India. Over the Huang-Huai-Hai Plain (3H) and Tibetan Plateau (TP) regions of China, the Tiedtke scheme simulates the more reasonable summer precipitation with high correlation coefficient and comparable amplitude. Especially, it reproduces a minimum convective precipitation bias of 8 mm d?1 and the lowest RMSEs throughout the year over East/South Asia. Furthermore, for seasonal variation of precipitation, the Tiedtke scheme results are closer to the observed data over the 3H and TP regions. However, none of the CPSs is able to simulate the seasonal variation over North Pakistan (NP). In comparison with previous research, the results of this study support the Grell scheme over South Asia. However, the Tiedtke scheme shows superiority for the 3H, TP and NP regions. The thicker PBL, less surface latent heat flux, the unique ability of deep convection and the entrainment process in the Tiedtke scheme are responsible for reducing the wet bias. Keywords: regional climate models (RCM),RegCM4, Tiedtke scheme, convective parameterization scheme, (CPS)topography, seasonality Citedy By: 0 Coupling of Regional Climate Model (RCM) and Hydrological Model, Author: Shaukat Ali, Dan Li, Fu Congbin, Firdos Khan and Yang Yang Journal: Amur-Okhotsk Consortium,Vol.(),2014--Pages Abstract: This study presents the coupling of REGional Climate Model (RegCM) and University of British Columbia (UBC) Hydrological Model. For validation and calibration the sensitivity of different parameters is analyzed for RegCM and UBC models. Our results for RegCM validation found that Tiedtke ismore realistic for mean state and seasonal variation of precipitation. Taylor diagrams also show that Tiedtke scheme has higher correlation (0.6~0.85) and standardized deviation close to one. Furthermore, Tiedtke shows closer agreement with TRMM and APHRO for seasonal variation of precipitation. Moreover, RegCM output needs bias correction being used for hydrological impact studies. The output of RegCM is first bias-corrected and then used as input to UBC model. Future runoff ismore in summer with 40% increase for 2041-2050 and 65% increase for 2071-2080. Therefore, the coupling technique show better results over the region of our study where there is lack of observation station data and can be usedwith more improvements. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Food Security and Food Production Systems Author: Porter, J.R., L. Xie, A. Challinor, K. Cochrane, S.M. Howden, M.M. Iqbal, D.B. Lobell and M.I. Travasso, Journal: Cambridge University Press, United Kingdom, ,Vol.(),2014--Pages485-533 Abstract: The effects of climate change on crop and terrestrial food production are evident in several regions of the world. Negative impacts of climate trends have been more common than positive ones. Positive trends are evident in some high latitude regions. Since AR4, there have been several periods of rapid food and cereal price increases following climate extremes in key producing regions, indicating a sensitivity of current markets to climate extremes, among other factors. Several of these climate extremes were made more likely as the result of anthropogenic emissions. Climate trends are affecting the abundance and distribution of harvested aquatic species, both freshwater and marine, and aquaculture production systems in different parts of the world. These are expected to continue with negative impacts on nutrition and food security for especially vulnerable people, particularly in some tropical developing countries, but with benefits in other regions that become more favorable for aquatic food production. Studies have documented a large negative sensitivity of crop yields to extreme daytime temperatures around 30C. These sensitivities have been identified for several crops and regions and exist throughout the growing season. Several studies report that temperature trends are important for determining both past and future impacts of climate change on crop yields at sub-continental to global scales At scales of individual countries or smaller, precipitation projections remain important but uncertain factors for assessing future impacts. All aspects of food security are potentially affected by climate change, including food access, utilization, and price stability. There remains limited quantitative understanding of how non-production elements of food security will be affected, and of the adaptation possibilities in these domains. Nutritional quality of food and fodder, including protein and micronutrients, is negatively affected by elevated CO2, but these effects may be counteracted by effects of other aspects of climate change. For the major crops (wheat, rice, and maize) in tropical and temperate regions, climate change without adaptation will negatively impact production for local temperature increases of 2C or more above late-20th-century levels, although individual locations may benefit. Projected impacts vary across crops and regions and adaptation scenarios, with about 10% of projections for the period 20302049 showing yield gains of more than 10% and about 10% of projections showing yield losses of more than 25%, compared to the late 20th century. After 2050, the risk of more severe impacts increases. Crop production is consistently and negatively affected by climate change in the future in low-latitude countries, while climate change may have positive or negative effects in northern latitudes. Climate change will increase progressively the inter-annual variability of crop yields in many regions. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Climate Variability and its Impacts on Water Resources in Upper Indus Basin under IPCC Climate Change Scenarios, Author: Firdos Khan, Juergen Pilz, Muhammad Amjad and David Wiberg Journal: International Journal of Global Warming ,Vol.(),2015--Pages Abstract: The output of a regional climate model (RCM), providing regional climate for impact studies (PRECIS), is used as input data to the hydrological model to produce inflow projections at the Tarbela Reservoir on the Indus River. Maximum temperature, minimum temperature and precipitation are investigated for possible climate change in the region. The hydrological model was calibrated for the 19952004 period and validated for the 19901994 period with almost 90% efficiencies. The projections of inflow to the Tarbela Reservoir show that there is an overall increase of 59.42% and 34.27% to the Tarbela Reservoir during the period of 20402069 under the A2 and the B2 scenarios, respectively. There will be much more water available in the future, with the highest inflow and comparatively more water shortage noted in the 2020s under the A2 scenario. Finally, the impacts of changing climates on the operation of Tarbela Dam are investigated. Keywords: Climate variability, water resources, Indus basin, regional climate model, hydrological model Citedy By: 0 Application of a stochastic weather generator to assess climate change impacts in a semi-arid climate: the Upper Indus Basin Author: N Forsythe, HJ Fowler, S Blenkinsop, A Burton, CG Kilsby, DR Archer, C Harpham, Hashmi, M. Z. Journal: Journal of Hydrology,Vol.(),--Pages Abstract: Assessing local climate change impacts requires downscaling from Global Climate Model simulations. Here, a stochastic rainfall model (RainSim) combined with a rainfall conditioned weather generator (CRU WG) have been successfully applied in a semi-arid mountain climate, for part of the Upper Indus Basin (UIB), for point stations at a daily time-step to explore climate change impacts. Validation of the simulated time-series against observations (19611990) demonstrated the models skill in reproducing climatological means of core variables with monthly RMSE of <2.0 mm for precipitation and ?0.4 C for mean temperature and daily temperature range. This level of performance is impressive given complexity of climate processes operating in this mountainous context at the boundary between monsoonal and mid-latitude (westerly) weather systems. Of equal importance the model captures well the observed interannual variability as quantified by the first and last decile of 30-year climatic periods. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Evaluation of weather research and forecasting model for the assessment of wind resource over Gharo, Pakistan Author: Muhammad Amjad, Qudsia Zafar, Firdos Khan and M. Munir Sheikh Journal: International Journal of Climatology ,Vol.35(8),2015--Pages1821-1832 Abstract: Weather research and forecasting (WRF) model is the state?of?the?art mesoscale model that could be used as a guideline to effectively assess the wind resource of Gharo wind station lying in the coastal belt of Pakistan. The anemometer heights of 10 and 30 m for the year 2005 have been used to study the wind profile of the region for summer (June, July, August, September) and winter (December, January, February, March). The study uses an innovative approach for model comparisons, i.e. an eta?half level is added in the model on 60 m height and is interpolated to 30 m height by using well known power law. This is done by studying the diurnal variation of wind shear for the whole year of 2005 in order to reduce maximum possible interpolation error. For both seasons, the error measures of mean bias error (MBE), mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean square error (RMSE) of 30 m interpolated data were found lower than 10 m height data with increased correlation (r). A bias correction methodology (best easy systematic estimator) was further applied over the model output showing a significant improvement toward MBE, MAE and RMSE reduction, i.e. up to 99%, 73% and 68% on 10 m height and 99%, 51% and 46% on 30 m height. Errors were reduced more for summer than winter. The selected bias correction methodology was thus found to be highly applicable for both model heights. The wind energy assessment of Gharo wind station from the corrected model simulation showed summer having more potential for wind energy than winter with an estimated energy of up to 1000 MWh. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Trends in extreme daily rainfall and temperature indices over South Asia Author: Sheikh, M.M., N. Manzoor, J. Ashraf, M. Adnan, D. Collins, S. Hameed, M.J. Manton, A.U. Ahmad, S.K. Baidya, H.P. Borganokar, N. Islam, D. Jayasinghearachchi, D.R. Kothawale, K.H.M.S. Premlal, J.V. Revadikar and M.I. Shrestha Journal: International Journal of Climatology,Vol.35(7),2015--Pages1625-1637 Abstract: Over the last few decades, weather and climate extremes have become a major focus of researchers, the media and general public due to their damaging effects on human society and infrastructure. Trends in indices of climate extremes are studied for the South Asian region using high?quality records of daily temperature and precipitation observations. Data records from 210 (265) temperature (precipitation) observation stations are analysed over the period 19712000 (19612000). Spatial maps of station trends, time series of regional averages and frequency distribution analysis form the basis of this study. Due to the highly diverse geography of the South Asian region, the results are also described for some specific regions, such as the island of Sri Lanka; the tropical region (excluding Sri Lanka); the Greater Himalayas above 35N, the Eastern Himalayas (Nepal) and the Thar Desert. Generally, changes in the frequency of temperature extremes over South Asia are what one would expect in a warming world; warm extremes have become more common and cold extremes less common. The warming influence is greater in the Eastern Himalayas compared with that in the Greater Himalayas. The Thar Desert also shows enhanced warming, but increases are mostly less than in the Eastern Himalayas. Changes in the indices of extreme precipitation are more mixed than those of temperature, with spatially coherent changes evident only at relatively small scales. Nevertheless, most extreme precipitation indices show increases in the South Asia average, consistent with globally averaged results. The indices trends are further studied in the context of Atmospheric Brown Clouds (ABCs) over the region. Countries falling within the ABC hotspot namely Indo?Gangetic Plain (IGP) have shown a different behaviour on the trends of extreme indices compared with the parts outside this hotspot. IGP has increased temperature and decreased rainfall and tally closely with the actual trends. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 A new magnitude category disaggregation approach for temporal high-resolution rainfall intensities Author: Muhammad Rehan Anis and Michael Rode Journal: Hydrological Processes,Vol.29(6),2015--Pages1119-1128 Abstract: Simulation of quick runoff components such as surface runoff and associated soil erosion requires temporal high?resolution rainfall intensities. However, these data are often not available because such measurements are costly and time consuming. Current rainfall disaggregation methods have shortcomings, especially in generating the distribution of storm events. The objectives of this study were to improve point rainfall disaggregation using a new magnitude category rainfall disaggregation approach. The procedure is introduced using a coupled disaggregation approach (Hyetos and cascade) for multisite rainfall disaggregation. The new procedure was tested with ten long?term precipitation data sets of central Germany using summer and winter precipitation to determine seasonal variability. Results showed that dividing the rainfall amount into four daily rainfall magnitude categories (110, 1125, 2650, >50?mm) improves the simulation of high rainfall intensity (convective rainfall). The Hyetos model category approach (HyetosCat) with seasonal variation performs representative to observed hourly rainfall compared with without categories on each month. The mean absolute percentage accuracy of standard deviation for hourly rainfall is 89.7% in winter and 95.6% in summer. The proposed magnitude category method applied with the coupled HyetosCatcascade approach reproduces successfully the statistical behaviour of local 10?min rainfall intensities in terms of intermittency as well as variability. The root mean square error performance statistics for disaggregated 10?min rainfall depth ranges from 0.20 to 2.38?mm for summer and from 0.12 to 2.82?mm for the winter season in all categories. The coupled stochastic approach preserves the statistical self?similarity and intermittency at each magnitude category with a relatively low computational burden. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Climate change impacts and adaptation options for water and food in Pakistan: scenario analysis using an integrated global water and food projections model, Author: Zhu, T., C. Ringler, M.M. Iqbal, T.B. Sulser and M.A. Goheer, Journal: Water International,Vol.38(5),2013--Pages651-669 Abstract: Climate change is expected to considerably affect the water resources in the Indus River basin in Pakistan and thus agricultural production in the country. This article reports an analysis of the impacts of various climate scenarios on both water resources and food production out to 2050. While changes in water availability range from 12% to +24%, depending on the scenario, crop yield and production impacts are negative across all scenarios, and net food imports increase. We suggest a combination of accelerated investment in agricultural research and increased water-use efficiency in agriculture to reduce the adverse impacts of climate change on water and food. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Statistically Downscaled Probabilistic Multi-model Ensemble Projections of Precipitation Change in a Watershed Author: Hashmi M. Z., A. Y. Shamseldin and B.W. Melville Journal: Hydrological Processes,Vol.27(7),2013--Pages1021-1032 Abstract: This paper presents the development of a probabilistic multi?model ensemble of statistically downscaled future projections of precipitation of a watershed in New Zealand. Climate change research based on the point estimates of a single model is considered less reliable for decision making, and multiple realizations of a single model or outputs from multiple models are often preferred for such purposes. Similarly, a probabilistic approach is preferable over deterministic point estimates. In the area of statistical downscaling, no single technique is considered a universal solution. This is due to the fact that each of these techniques has some weaknesses, owing to its basic working principles. Moreover, watershed scale precipitation downscaling is quite challenging and is more prone to uncertainty issues than downscaling of other climatological variables. So, multi?model statistical downscaling studies based on a probabilistic approach are required. In the current paper, results from the three well?reputed statistical downscaling methods are used to develop a Bayesian weighted multi?model ensemble. The three members of the downscaling ensemble of this study belong to the following three broad categories of statistical downscaling methods: (1) multiple linear regression, (2) multiple non?linear regression, and (3) stochastic weather generator. The results obtained in this study show that the new strategy adopted here is promising because of many advantages it offers, e.g. it combines the outputs of multiple statistical downscaling methods, provides probabilistic downscaled climate change projections and enables the quantification of uncertainty in these projections. This will encourage any future attempts for combining the results of multiple statistical downscaling methods Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Remote-sensing assessment of glacier fluctuations in the Hindu Raj, Pakistan Author: Mehmet A. Sarikya , Michael P. Bishop , John F. Shroder and Ghazanfar Ali, Journal: International Journal of Remote Sensing,Vol.(),2013--Pages3968-3985 Abstract: Space-based assessments of glaciers across the Himalayas indicate that there is a spatial variation in glacier fluctuations due to variations in local topography, regional climate, and ice-flow dynamics. Unfortunately, limited information is available on glacier fluctuations in northern Pakistan. In this work, we quantify the glacier terminus variations in the Hindu Raj region of Pakistan, where we used Landsat and Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) time-series data for 1972, 1989, 1999, and 2007. Eighty-five mountain glaciers of various sizes, orientations, and altitudes were sampled. Our results show that most of the glaciers (70.6%) retreated over the last four decades, although some glaciers advanced (17.6%) or exhibited no detectable change in terminus position (11.8%). Larger glaciers with lower terminus altitudes exhibited greater retreat distances than smaller high-altitude glaciers. Long-term climate data analysis reveals that the recession of glaciers appears to be associated with the rising of summer temperatures in the Hindu Raj. Our results support a spatial trend of an increase in shrinking glaciers towards the western portion of northern Pakistan, with a greater frequency of advancing glaciers towards the east. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Impact of altitude and latitude on changes in temperature extremes over South Asia during 1971-2000 Author: Journal: Int. J. Climatol. ,Vol.33(1),2012--Pages199-209 Abstract: South Asia covers more than 30 of latitude with weather observation stations situated from 6N at Galle, Sri Lanka, to 36N at Chitral in Pakistan. Moreover, the South Asian station network ranges in altitude from sea level to nearly 4000 m above sea level. This paper uses time series of 11 objectively defined indices of daily temperature extremes at 197 stations in Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka to examine the possible impacts of elevation and latitude on changes in temperature extremes over the period of 19712000. Trends in extreme indices are consistent with general warming only at low altitudes and latitudes. Stations at high altitudes and latitudes show both positive and negative trends in extreme temperature indices. As a notable example, the Diurnal Temperature Range (DTR), which has been known to decrease in most parts of the globe, has increasing trends over many high altitude stations in South Asia. Trends in extreme temperature indices at stations in South Asia higher than 2000 m above sea level are mostly in disagreement with those reported over the Tibetan Plateau. Observed trends at low altitude locations in South Asia suggest that these sites can generally expect future changes in temperature extremes that are consistent with broad?scale warming. High?elevation sites appear to be more influenced by local factors and, hence, future changes in temperature extremes may be less predictable for these locations. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Global Environmental Changes in South Asia: A Regional Perspective Author: Mitra, A.P.,Sharma, C. (Eds.) Journal: Capital Publishing Company,Vol.(),--Pages2010 Abstract: The Fourth Assessment Report of IPCC having clinched in 2007 the evidence of global warming on account of anthropogenic activities, backed with scientific data gathered and analyzed globally, has made it mandatory world over to focus efforts on delineation of the anticipated adverse impacts of global warming on regional temperature and moisture regimes and the linked hydrologic, climatic and biospheric processes. First and foremost is the requirement to understand vulnerability to food and livelihood security in various ecosystemson mainland, mid-range and high mountains as well as coastal areas including CEZs. The projected global temperature rise of the order of about two degrees or more and further rise at a decadal rate of o around 0. 2 C is sufficient to make grievous changes in sea surface level and submerge many low lying coastal areas around the world thereby possibly causing unprecedented losses to human habitat and livelihood in the coming years. A rise in climate variability is also becoming increasingly evident with potential direct impact on agricultural performance, on water accessibility and on weather extremes. Developing countries due to their poor infrastructure, limited resources and large impoverished population are likely to face more intense and wi- spread adverse impact of climate change than the developed world and also have limited adaptation capacity. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Agro-Ecosystems and their contribution to environmental change in the Indus Basin of Pakistan, Author: M. Mohsin Iqbal and M. Arif Goheer, Journal: Advances in Atmospheric Sciences,Vol.25(6),2008--Pages1043-4052 Abstract: There is growing concern that increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have been responsible for global warming through their effect on radiation balance and temperature. The magnitude of emissions and the relative importance of different sources vary widely, regionally and locally. The Indus Basin of Pakistan is the food basket of the country and agricultural activities are vulnerable to the effects of global warming due to accelerated emissions of GHGs. Many developments have taken place in the agricultural sector of Pakistan in recent decades in the background of the changing role of the government and the encouragement of the private sector for investment in new ventures. These interventions have considerable GHG emission potential. Unfortunately, no published information is currently available on GHG concentrations in the Indus Basin to assess their magnitude and emission trends. The present study is an attempt to estimate GHG (CO2, CH4 and N2O) emissions arising from different agro-ecosystems of Indus Basin. The GHGs were estimated mostly using the IPCC Guidelines and data from the published literature. The results showed that CH4 emissions were the highest (4.126 Tg yr?1) followed by N2O (0.265 Tg yr?1) and CO2 (52.6 Tg yr?1). The sources of CH4 are enteric fermentation, rice cultivation and cultivation of other crops. N2O is formed by microbial denitrification of NO3 produced from applied fertilizer-N on cropped soils or by mineralization of native organic matter on fallow soils. CO2 is formed by the burning of plant residue and by soil respiration due to the decomposition of soil organic matter. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Hydrometeorology of Floods and Droughts in South Asia A Brief Appraisal, Author: S. Nandargi, O.N. Dhar, M.M.Q. Mirza, Brenna Enright and M. Munir Sheikh, published by APN, Japan, START and Fred J Hansen Journal: Climate and Water Resources in South Asia: Vulnerability and Adaptation, Institute for World Peace (2007),Vol.(),2007--Pages Abstract: Flooding is a common event in South Asia. In fact, it has been said that after Bangladesh, India is the worst flood affected country in the world (Agarwal and Narayan). It is possible for extreme floods to inundate up to approximately 10 million hectares or nearly 70 percent of Bangladesh. By contrast, about 40 million hectares or nearly 12.5 percent of India is flood prone. Different types and extents of flooding occur in different regions of the subcontinent. Keywords: Monsoon SeasonUnited Nations Environment ProgramIndia Meteorological DepartmentWorld Meteorological OrganizationHydrological Drought Citedy By: 0 Regional Climate Modeling for the Developing World: The ICTP RegCM3 and RegCNET, Author: Jeremy S. Pal, Filippo Giorgi, M. Ashfaq, Faisal S. Syed, Journal: Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society,Vol.(),2007--Pages1396-1409 Abstract: Regional climate models are important research tools available to scientists around the world, including in economically developing nations (EDNs). The Earth Systems Physics (ESP) group of the Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) maintains and distributes a state-of-the-science regional climate model called the ICTP Regional Climate Model version 3 (RegCM3), which is currently being used by a large research community for a diverse range of climate-related studies. The RegCM3 is the central, but not only, tool of the ICTP-maintained Regional Climate Research Network (RegCNET) aimed at creating southsouth and northsouth scientific interactions on the topic of climate and associated impacts research and modeling. In this paper, RegCNET, RegCM3, and illustrative results from RegCM3 benchmark simulations applied over south Asia, Africa, and South America are presented. It is shown that RegCM3 performs reasonably well over these regions and is therefore useful for climate studies in EDNs. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Prospects for Wheat Production under Changing Climate in Mountain Areas of Pakistan An Econometric Analysis Author: Syed Sajidn Hussain, Muhammad Mudasser Journal: Agricultural Systems,Vol.94(),2007--Pages494-501 Abstract: We assesspotential future impacts ofclimate change onwheat yields inSwat andChitral districts ofPakistan, mountainous areaswith average altitudes of 960 and 1500 m above sea level, respectively. Using past climate data (19762000) to track temperature trendsin both study districts, we ?nd that increased temperatures correspond to an increase in Growing Degree Days (GDDs) and a decrease in GrowingSeasonLength(GSL).Chitral district showsastrongerdecline inseasonlengththan Swatdistrict. Comparedwith theesti-mated optimum level of 157 days, the 25 year average GSL for the dominant varieties is estimated to be 156 days in Swat districtand 195 days in Chitral district. Future increases in temperature of 1.5 and 3? C are likely to cause wheat yields to decline (by 7%and 24% respectively) in Swat district and increase (by 14% and 23% respectively) in Chitral district. Future increases in precipitationof 515%during thegrowingseasonshow anegligibleimpacton wheatyield.Development and dissemination of short duration varieties, which can withstand the climatic anomalies expected in the future, shouldbe given priority in the mountain region. More recent High Yielding Varieties (HYV) of the warmer plain areas should also be tested andintroduced in the mountain areas because the expected future increases in temperatures caused by global warming would render thesevarieties suitable for the mountain areas. Keywords: Climatechange impact;Wheat yield; Mountain areas; Growing seasonlength; Transcendentalmodel; Chitral; Swat; Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Effect of Remote Forcings on the Winter Precipitation of Central Southwest Asia Author: Faisal S. Syed, Filippo Giorgi, Jeremy Pal, M. P. King, Journal: Observations, Theoretical and Applied Climatology,Vol.86(1-4),2006--Pages147-160 Abstract: We investigate the effects of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) and the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) on winter precipitation in Central Southwest Asia (CSWA) using an analysis of available observed climate data. The analysis is based on correlations, composites and Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) performed using the gridded dataset of the Climatic Research Unit (CRU) and station data for the region. We find that both the NAO and ENSO affect climate over the region. In particular a positive precipitation anomaly is typically found in correspondence of the positive NAO phase and warm ENSO phase over a sub-region encompassing northern Pakistan, Afghanistan, Tajikistan and southern Uzbekistan. This conclusion is supported by a consistency across the different analysis methods and observation datasets employed in our study. A physical mechanism for such effect is proposed, by which western disturbances are intensified over the region as they encounter a low pressure trough, which is a dominant feature during positive NAO and warm ENSO conditions. Our results give encouraging indications towards the development of statistically-based prediction tools for winter precipitation over the CSWA region. Keywords: Singular Value Decomposition, North Atlantic, Oscillation, Winter Precipitation, Southern Oscillation Index, Climatic Research Unit Citedy By: 0 Food Security in the Context of Climate Change In Pakistan Author: Anum Tariq, Nazia Tabasam, Khuda Bakhsh, M. Asfaq, Sarfraz Hassan Journal: Pakistan Journal of Commerce and Social Sciences ,Vol.8(2),2014--Pages540-550 Abstract: The present study determines the impact of climate change on wheat production along with its per capita availability. The study is different from previous studies as it considers the irrigated and rain-fed regions of the Punjab province. Separate production functions are used for the irrigated and rain-fed regions. Tests for determining normality, linearity, autocorrelation and multi-collinearity are also applied. Results show that in the irrigated region, rising maximum temperature during January and November has negative effect, whereas variables such as wheat area, minimum temperature during November and March are positively related with wheat production. Considering the rain-fed region, minimum temperature during February and November has significant impact on wheat production whereas rainfall in the month of March is negatively related with wheat production. Three different scenarios used to project future impact of temperature and rainfall on wheat indicate a decline in future per capita availability of wheat as a result of climate change, in addition to rising population in Pakistani Punjab. Considering an increase in temperature by 3oC in 2050, per capita availability of wheat would be only 84 kg per annum compared to 198 kg per annum in 2012. So adaptation to climate change in the forms of new varieties and better management practices would lessen the impact of climate change. Keywords: temperature, precipitation, food security, irrigated region, rain-fed, Punjab. Citedy By: 0 Climate Change Implications for Food Security; Pakistan Perspective Author: Ghani A and Muhammad A Journal: Agricultural Research & Technology,Vol.7(4),2017--Pages Abstract: The agro based economy of Pakistan has largely been impacted by climate change induced floods and droughts. Despite negligible contributor to climate issues, Pakistan is at the fore front of climate change induced hazards, which challenges its food security. Unfortunately, there is lack of national and international focus on climate change induced risks mitigation and adaptation practices in Pakistan. Importantly, agricultural production in Pakistan has both regional and global implications, thus needs emergency measures for ensuring agricultural sustainability. There is need to conserve the available water through improved rainwater harvesting, increased water productivity and increased irrigation efficiency on farms. Sustainable watershed management practices for controlling erosion, sedimentation and increasing surface storage and groundwater recharge needs to be pursued through larger national and international spending. Capacity building of stake holders can be helpful in promoting sustainable agriculture and greater community livelihood and resilience to climate change in the country Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Contact us Office Address: PASTIC National Centre,QAU Campus, Islamabad. 051-9248103-04 Director General Office Prof. Dr. Muhammad Akram Shaikh, Director General Phone: 051-9248106 Fax: 051-9248113 E-Mail: dg@pastic.gov.pk (PS to Director General) 051-9248106 Fax: 051-9248113 Director Office Dr. Saima Huma Tanveer, Director Phone: 051-9248114 E-Mail: director@pastic.gov.pk Administration Additional Director (ADMIN) Focal person for public complain and pension matters Phone: 051-9248105 E-Mail: ad_admin@pastic.gov.pk Deputy Director(Admn) Phone: 051-9248116 E-Mail: sobhokhan1968@gmail.com Assistant Director(Admn) Phone: 051-9248103-4 (Ext. 126) E-Mail: shahidiqbalmba@gmail.com Accounts Additional Director(Accounts) Phone: 051-9248115 E-Mail: ghaffarpastic4@gmail.com Assistant Director Accounts Phone: 051-9248103-4(Ext. 126) Assistant Accounts Phone: 051-9248103-4(Ext. 135) E-Mail: sohailpastic@gmail.com Technological Information Services Additional Director (STI) Phone: 051-9248128 E-Mail: shah_aftab@yahoo.com Bibliographic/Document Supply Section Senior Scientific Information Officer Phone: 051-9248103-4 (Ext. 141) E-Mail: bib@pastic.gov.pk Publication Section Additional Director (STI) Phone: 051-9248102 E-Mail: publications@pastic.gov.pk Scientific Information Officer Phone: 051-9248103-4 (Ext. 104) Liaison and Coordination Section Additional Director (STI) Phone: 051-9248102 E-Mail: doc@pastic.gov.pk IT Support Section Principal System Analyst Phone: 051-9248111 E-Mail: psa@pastic.gov.pk Web Manager Phone: 051-9248109 E-Mail: webmaster@pastic.gov.pk PASTIC National Science Reference Library Principal Librarian Phone: 051-9248107 E-Mail: pl@pastic.gov.pk Reprographic Services Section Incharge Reprographic Unit Phone: 051-9248118 E-Mail: mru@pastic.gov.pk Training section Assistant Director Trainings Phone: 051-9248103-4 (Ext. 143) E-Mail: training@pastic.gov.pk Sub Centers Karachi Assistant Director (STI) Phone: 021-99243621 E-Mail: psc-karachi@pastic.gov.pk A-43, Block No.3, Gulshan-e-Iqbal, Karachi Lahore Additional Director (STI) Phone: 042-99230732 E-Mail: psc-lahore@pastic.gov.pk PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Ferozepur Road, Lahore Peshawar Additional Director (STI) Phone: 091-9216880 E-Mail: psc-peshawar@pastic.gov.pk Pakistan Forest Institute University Campus, Peshawar Faisalabad Additional Director (STI) Phone: 041-9200608-9 E-Mail: pasticf@pastic.gov.pk ,pasticf@yahoo.com Faisalabad Science Centre, Jail Road, Faisalabad Quetta Assistant Director (STI) Phone: 081-9211850 E-Mail: psc-quetta@pastic.gov.pk University of Balochistan (Arts Campus), Sariab Road, Quetta Muzaffarabad Lower Division Clerk (LDC) Phone: 05822-960414 E-Mail: psc-muzaffarabad@pastic.gov.pk University of AJ&K Muzaffarabad Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan - Research Journals Database Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan Periodicals are very important source of information, which contain latest research findings on different issues. The periodicals provide the medium to the scientists and researchers for publishing their research work. Therefore in view of the importance of the periodicals, an Online database of scientific periodicals of Pakistan is by PASTIC. This database includes the periodicals being published from Pakistan which provides a full guide to the scientific periodicals of Pakistan for answering specific reference questions about these periodicals of Pakistan. This database contains information on 300 S&T and related periodicals of Pakistan. Sufficient detail has been provided about each periodical for facilitating the users and further interaction with the editor or publisher of periodicals. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Energy Articles Research & Insights on Biomass and Renewable Energy in Pakistan Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Energy Articles Energy Articles The relationship between energy consumption and economic growth in Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: A Aqeel, MS Butt Journal: Asia-Pacific Development Journal,Vol.8(2),2011--Pages Abstract: This paper investigates the causal relationship between energy consumption and economic growth and energy consumption and employment in Pakistan. By applying techniques of co-integration and Hsiao's version of Granger causality, the results infer that economic growth causes total energy consumption. Economic growth also leads to growth in petroleum consumption, while on the other hand, neither economic growth nor gas consumption affect each other. However, in the power sector it has been found that electricity consumption leads to economic growth without feedback. The implications of the study are that energy conservation policy regarding petroleum consumption would not lead to any side-effects on economic growth in Pakistan. However, an energy growth policy in the case of gas and electricity consumption should be adopted in such a way that it stimulates growth in the economy and thus expands employment opportunities Keywords: Pakistan, energy, electricity consumption Citedy By: 414 Sustainable energy options for Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: M. Asif Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.13(4),2009--Pages903-909 Abstract: With the advent of the year 2008, Pakistan faces a gap of 4500MW between the demand and supply of electricity, registering a shortfall of 40%. The article provides an overview of the key dimensions of the crisis, ie growing gap between demand and supply, diminishing indigenous oil and gas reserves, rising energy cost and security concerns. It also explores hydropower, solar energy, biomass and wind power as sustainable energy options for the country. In has been found that the total estimated hydropower potential is more than 42 GW out of which only 6.5 GW has been tapped so far. In terms of available solar energy Pakistan is amongst the richest countries in the world, having an annual global irradiance value of 19002200 kWh/m2 . Despite that fact that the biomass plays an important role in the primary energy mix by contributing to 36% of the total supplies, it has not managed to break into the commercial energy market. Wind power, also been identified as a potential source of energy, is yet to take off Keywords: potential source of energy, primary energy mix Citedy By: 128 Energy consumption, real income and temporal causality: results from a multi-country study based on cointegration and error-correction modelling techniques [PDF] researchgate.net Author: AMM Masih Journal: Journal: Energy Economics,Vol.18(3),1996--Pages165-183 Abstract: Unlike previous studies on the causal relationship between energy consumption and economic growth, this paper illustrates how the finding of cointegration (i.e. long-term equilibrium relationship) between these variables, may be used in testing Granger causality. Based on the most recent Johansen's multivariate cointegration tests preceded by various unit root or non-stationarity tests, we test for cointegration between total energy consumption and real income of six Asian economies: India, Pakistan, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines. Non-rejection of cointegration between variables rules out Granger non-causality and imples at least one way of Granger-causality, either unidirectional or bidirectionial. Secondly, by using a dynamic vector error-correction model, we then analyse the direction of Granger-causation and hence the within-sample Granger-exogeneity or endogeneity of each of the variables. Thirdly, the relative strength of the causality is gauged (through the dynamic variance decomposition technique) by decomposing the total impact of an unanticipated shock to each of the variables beyond the sample period, into proportions attributable to shocks in the other variables including its own, in the bivariate system. Results based on these tools of methodology indicate that while all pair-wise relationships shared common univariate integrational properties, only relationships for three countries (India, Pakistan and Indonesia) were cointegrated. For these countries, temporal causality results were mixed with unidirectional causality from energy to income for India, exactly the reverse for Indonesia, and mutual causality for Pakistan. The VDCs were not inconsistent with these results and provided us with an additional insight as to the relatively more *Corresponding author. Phone: (616) 268 8091; Fax: (616) 268 8450; Telex: ADFADM AA 62030; E-Mail: a-masih@adfa.oz.au 0140-9883/96/$15.00 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved PIIS0140-9883(96) 00009-6 166 A.M.M. Masih, 1~ Masih / Energy Economics 18 (1996) 165-183 dominant direction of causation in Pakistan. Simple bivariate vector-autoregressive models for the three non-cointegrated systems did not indicate any direction of causality, significantly in either direction. Keywords: energy consumption, economic growth, pair-wise relationships Citedy By: 805 Energy consumption and GDP in developing countries: a cointegrated panel analysis [PDF] Author: CC Lee Journal: Energy economics,Vol.27(3),2005--Pages415-425 Abstract: In this paper we re-investigate the co-movement and the causality relationship between energy consumption and GDP in 18 developing countries, using data for the period 1975 to 2001. Recently developed tests for the panel unit root, heterogeneous panel cointegration, and panel-based error correction models are employed. The empirical results provide clear support of a long-run cointegration relationship after allowing for the heterogeneous country effect. The long-run relationship is estimated using a full-modified OLS. The evidence shows that long-run and short-run causalities run from energy consumption to GDP, but not vice versa. This result indicates that energy conservation may harm economic growth in developing countries regardless of being transitory or permanent. Keywords: Energy consumption; Income; Panel cointegration; Causality Citedy By: 784 Biogas, renewable energy resource for Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: SS Amjid, MQ Bilal, MS Nazir, A Hussain Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.15(6),2011--Pages2833-2837 Abstract: Developing countries are in critical energy crisis. Pakistan spends almost 7 billion US$ on import of fossil fuels annually to congregate its energy needs. The renewable and sustainable energy resources are best substitute to the conventional fuels and energy sources. Pakistan takes the opportunity to have almost 159 million animals producing almost 652 million kg of manure daily from cattle and buffalo only; that can be used to generate 16.3 million m3 biogas per day and 21 million tons of bio fertilizer per year. That compensate approximately 20% of nitrogen and 66% of phosphorus required in the crop fields. Apart from this sugarcane industry has got the potential to generate 3000 MW energy. Domestic biogas plants were started in Pakistan in 1959 and at present there is significant number of such working units. Biogas Support Program (BSP) was started in 2000 by Pakistani government. So far it has achieved the target of installing 1200 biogas units, whereas another 10,000 units are expected to be set up in coming 05 years that will harvest almost 27% of countrys biogas potential. A biogas unit of 10 m3 size is anticipated to save almost 92,062 PKR per year on account of conventional fuels spent otherwise. Womens opportunity cost, with introduction of biogas units reportedly increased; subsequently impacting positively on household income. Biogas energy generation systems are in demand and their number is increasing steadily. They are low-cost and can be run with very small budget. Biogas energy corridor can work as a good substitute for nearly 70% of countrys population residing in rural areas. Installation of plants to bottle the biogas can be additional opportunity. The need of a national policy is imperative to bring this technology at farmers doorstep. Keywords: Biogas, Biogas Support Program, bio fertilizer Citedy By: 78 Renewable energy technologies in Pakistan: prospects and challenges [PDF] academia.edu Author: MA Chaudhry, R Raza, SA Hayat Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.13(6-7),2009--Pages1657-1662 Abstract: Pakistan is an energy-deficient country. This paper accentuates the importance and challenges of new era technologies. The renewable energy sources like wind energy, solar energy, geothermal energy, ocean energy, biomass energy and fuel cell technology can be used to overcome energy shortage in Pakistan. Renewable energy sources and technologies have the potential to provide solutions to the long-standing energy problems being faced by the developing countries. The expansion of existing energy resources and exploration of new sources is an important exercise to be considered in order to sustain their development initiatives. Keywords: Renewable energy; Wind; Solar; Geothermal; Hydro-power; Biomass; Fuel cell Citedy By: 72 Energy consumption and GDP in developing countries: a cointegrated panel analysis [PDF] Author: CC Lee Journal: Energy economics,Vol.27(3),2005--Pages415-427 Abstract: In this paper we re-investigate the co-movement and the causality relationship between energy consumption and GDP in 18 developing countries, using data for the period 1975 to 2001. Recently developed tests for the panel unit root, heterogeneous panel cointegration, and panel-based error correction models are employed. The empirical results provide clear support of a long-run cointegration relationship after allowing for the heterogeneous country effect. The long-run relationship is estimated using a full-modified OLS. The evidence shows that long-run and short-run causalities run from energy consumption to GDP, but not vice versa. This result indicates that energy conservation may harm economic growth in developing countries regardless of being transitory or permanent. Keywords: Energy consumption; Income; Panel cointegration; Causality Citedy By: 784 An overview of biomass energy utilization in Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: UK Mirza, N Ahmad, T Majeed Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.12(7),2008--Pages1988-1996 Abstract: Energy plays a pivotal role in socio-economic development by raising standard of living. Biomass has been used as an energy source for thousands of years by the humankind. Traditional fuels like firewood, dung and crop residues currently contribute a major share in meeting the everyday energy requirements of rural and low-income urban households in Pakistan. An average biomass using household consumes 2325 kg of firewood or 1480 kg of dung or 1160 kg of crop residues per annum. There are good prospects for using biogas energy in rural areas through a network of community biogas plants. Development of fuel-efficient cook stoves is a modest effort to help conserve biomass energy at domestic level. PCRET has so far installed 60,000 energy-conserving, improved cooking stoves all over the country, which are 1228% efficient. E-10 gasoline pilot project and research on biodiesel production are underway. Sugarcane bagasse can potentially be used to generate 2000 MW of electric power. Attention is now being given to the use of municipal and industrial waste for power generation. The government is financing many projects related to biomass energy development in the country, but still lot more efforts are needed for harnessing full potential and taking maximum benefit out of this important renewable energy resource. r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Keywords: Energy; Biomass; Biogas; Bagasse; Pakistan Keywords: Energy; Biomass; Biogas; Bagasse; Pakistan Citedy By: 120 Wind energy development in Pakista [PDF] Author: UK Mirza, N Ahmad, T Majeed, K Harijan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.11(9),2007--Pages2179-2190 Abstract: Pakistan has a very limited fossil fuel resource base. The poor economy does not allow the import of fossil fuels, particularly oil, on a large scale. Moreover, too much reliance on imported oil is critical from energy security point of view. A large fraction of the population lives in remote areas and is still waiting to be connected to the national electricity grid. To help these remote communities in particular, and to overcome energy shortages in general, Pakistan needs to develop its indigenous energy resources like hydropower, solar and wind. More than 1000 km long coastline in south and some places in northern mountainous areas provide an excellent resource of wind energy. This vast potential can be exploited to produce electricity on both community and wind farm scales. Applications other than electricity production, such as water pumping, also have vast applications. This article discusses the past, the present and the future of wind energy use in Pakistan. The efforts for the utilization of wind energy in the country are presented as well, along with barriers to its development. It is concluded that the potential exists, but significant efforts are needed to effectively make use of this cheap renewable energy source. Keywords: Wind energy; Pakistan Citedy By: 71 Energy and renewable energy scenario of Pakistan [PDF] amazonaws.com Author: MA Sheikh Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.14(1),2010--Pages354-363 Abstract: This paper presents a review about conventional and renewable energy scenario of the county in quantitative terms of supply, generation and exploitation of available resources. In this energy scenario, the renewable energy share is in the range of a fraction of a percentage compared to total conventional energy supplies, so depicting it as a sector of least significance for government. Main emphasis in this paper has been given on presentation of data about renewable energy (RE) installations in the country, on-going activities, development projects, RE planning and achievements of public sector RE institutions and organizations. At the end some suggestions are given for effective planning and exploitation of RE resources and use of technologies. These suggestions are not only useful for Pakistan but also are equally important for the third world countries to enhance appreciably RE contribution in their total energy supplies of their country. Keywords: Energy; Renewable; Energy planning/status Citedy By: 117 Greener energy: Issues and challenges for Pakistan-Biomass energy prospective [PDF] Author: AW Bhutto, AA Bazmi, G Zahedi Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy ,Vol.14(1),2010--Pages354363 Abstract: : Diversification of fuel sources is imperative to address the energy security, climate change, and sustainable development issues; therefore, it is essential to address the energy crisis through the extensive utilization of abundant renewable energy resources, such as biomass energy, solar energy, wind energy and geothermal energy. Improving energy services for poor households in developing countries remains one of the most pressing challenges facing the development community. Earlier studies suggest in South Asia the households are likely to follow the energy ladder comprising fuels like dung, crop residue, firewood, kerosene, gobar gas, LPG, and electricity for cooking purposes. Evidence suggests that while it is possible to observe such transition in urban and semi-urban areas, the change is very slow in rural areas. In rural Pakistan,the access to commercial energy resources is limited,the majority ofthe households still heavily rely on traditional methods of using wood, animal waste and crop waste for domestic fuel needs. Efficiencies of use are very low and most of the potential is wasted because of non-scientific conventional technologies. Consequently there is an obligatory need to develop modern bio-energy technologies since renewable resources may serve to supplement the long-term energy needs of Pakistan to a significant level. Though the bio-resource base of Pakistan is substantial, its contribution to useful energy is low. In this paper we called attention to issues and challenges in biomass utilization for energy in Pakistan in context of sustainable development. This paper has identified areas in Pakistan where there is considerable scope to modernize biomass energy production delivery systems to provide varied energy carriers such as electricity, industrial and domestic fuel and gases. Barriers are examined over the whole biomass energy spectrum and policy issue and institutional roles and responsibilities are discussed. Keywords: Greener energy, Utilization for energy in Pakistan Citedy By: 84 Is energy consumption effective to spur economic growth in Pakistan? New evidence from bounds test to level relationships and Granger causality tests [PDF] https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/39734/1/MPRA_paper_39734.pdf Author: M Shahbaz, M Zeshan, T Afza Journal: Economic Modelling,Vol.29(6),2012--Pages23102319 Abstract: The present study investigates the relationship between energy (renewable and nonrenewable) consumption and economic growth using Cobb-Douglas production function in case of Pakistan over the period of 1972-2011. We have used ARDL bounds testing and Gregory and Hansen (1990) structural break cointegration approaches for long run while stationarity properties of the variables are tested applying Clemente-Montanes-Reyes (1998) structural break unit root test. Our results confirm co-integration between renewable energy consumption, nonrenewable energy consumption, economic growth, capital and labor in case of Pakistan. The findings show that both renewable and nonrenewable energy consumption add to economic growth. Capital and labour are also important determinants of economic growth. The VECM granger causality analysis validates the existence of feedback hypotheses between renewable energy consumption and economic growth, nonrenewable energy consumption and economic growth, economic growth and capital. Keywords: Energy Consumption, Economic Growth, Pakistan Keywords: nonrenewable energy,economic growth, VECM granger causality analysis Citedy By: 118 Selection of renewable energy technologies for a developing county: a case of Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: M Amer, TU Daim Journal: Energy for Sustainable Development,Vol.15(4),2011--Pages420435 Abstract: In this paper some renewable energy options for electricity generation for Pakistan are explored from multiple perspectives comprising technical, economical, social, environmental and political aspects. Analytic hierarchy process (AHP) has been used for the first time for the energy sector of Pakistan. An AHP model has been presented for the selection and prioritization of various renewable energy technologies for electricity generation. After accessing potential of the country for generating electricity from renewable resources, reviewing relevant scholarly literature and discussion with experts, an appropriate decision model has been formulated consisting of goal, criteria, sub-criteria and alternatives. Wind energy, solar photovoltaic, solar thermal and biomass energy options are used as the alternatives in the decision model. Besides ranking and prioritizing of these technologies, results of the proposed decision model can also be used for the development of long-term renewable energy policy and energy roadmap for the country. The findings of this research might also be highly relevant to other developing countries. Keywords: Decision making; Analytic hierarchy process; Renewable energy; Electricity; Pakistan Citedy By: 111 Energy and economic growth in Pakistan [PDF] pide.org.pk Author: R Siddiqui Journal: The Pakistan Development Review,Vol.43(2),2004--Pages175-200 Abstract: Recent rise in energy prices, shrinking existing resources, and the search for alternative sources of energy and energy conservation technologies have brought into focus the issue of causality between energy use and economic growth. The results of this study show that energy expansion is expected to lead to higher growth and its shortage may retard the growth process. The impact of all sources of energy on economic growth is not the same. The impact of electricity and petroleum products as well as that of electricity only is high and statistically significant. However, the reverse causality is critical for the petroleum products Keywords: Economic growth models, Economic growth rate, energy consumption, Pakistan Citedy By: 95 Renewable energy for managing energy crisis in Pakistan [PDF] Author: K Harijan, MA Uqaili, M Memon Journal: International Multi Topic Conference,Vol.(),2008--Pages449-455 Abstract: Only 55% of the Pakistans population has access to electricity and per capita supply is about 520 kWh. At present, the people are facing severe load shedding/blackout problems due to shortage of about 3 GW power supply. Gas and oil have 65% share in conventional electricity generation. Indigenous reserves of oil and gas are limited and the country heavily depends on imported oil. The oil import bill is a serious strain on the countrys economy. Though there is huge coal potential in the country but has not been utilized due to various reasons. This shows that Pakistan must develop renewables to manage the energy crises. This paper analyses the prospects of renewable for managing the energy crises in the country. The study concludes that there is substantial potential of renewables in the country for managing the present energy crises as well as meeting the future energy needs. Keywords: Energy crisis Electricity demand Renewable energy Environment friendly Pakistan Citedy By: 33 Renewable energy in Pakistan: status and trends [PDF] atrc.net.pk Author: NA Khan, IA Mirza, MS Khalil Journal: Alternative Energy Development Board (AEDB),Vol.(),2014--Pages Abstract: Energy consumption in Pakistan is mainly dependent on conventional fuels that are usually imported and each increase in the oil prices in the international market results in a proportional increase in fuel prices in the country. This situation along with the concerns over the rapid depletion of countrys natural gas reserves has raised very serious concerns on availability of energy and its security. As of 2003 there was no use of renewable energy in the country and the Government having realized that created an autonomous Alternative Energy Development Board (AEDB). This Board has been created to coordinate, facilitate and promote Alternative / Renewable Energy technologies so as to achieve 5% share of power generation through renewable energies by year 2030. This article provides an overview of the potential of various renewable energy sources , various developments project undertaken by the Government of Pakistan and its mid term and long term plan. Keywords: Sustainability, Renewable Energy, Solar Energy, Wind Power, Photovoltaic Citedy By: 5 Specific concerns of Pakistan in the context of energy security issues and geopolitics of the region [PDF] Author: MH Sahir, AH Qureshi Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.35(4),2007--Pages20312037 Abstract: The global and regional energy security in future is not likely to be threatened as much by the shortage of resources as it is likely to be endangered by the disruption of supplies and availability of tradable resources: threatened by growing terrorism and geopolitical conflicts. Pakistan's geo-strategic position and its importance act to both influence and undermine its energy security issues. It has the potential to provide a corridor for regional energy trade but it is ranked among the top nations exposed to potential threat of terrorist attacks because of the consequences of its role in the major geopolitical expeditions of the recent past. The paper examines the concerns of Pakistan emanating from the regional and global geopolitics of energy from Pakistan's viewpoint. Keywords: Energy security; Terrorism; Pakistan Citedy By: 54 Pioneering new indoor temperature standards: the Pakistan project [PDF] Author: F Nicol, S Roaf Journal: Energy and Buildings,Vol.23(3),1996--Pages169-174 Abstract: Field surveys of thermal comfort have been conducted summer and winter in the five climatic regions of Pakistan to help the Pakistani Government to replace existing inappropriate indoor temperature standards. Results are presented which show large variations in desired indoor temperature with climate and season. The reasons for the differences are explored and an indication of the way in which responsive indoor temperature standards, which encourage the use of passive architecture and save energy in air-conditioned buildings, might be framed is presented Keywords: Thermal comfort, Field survey, Pakistan, Climate, Energy Citedy By: 138 Identifying and addressing barriers to renewable energy development In Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: UK Mirza, N Ahmad, K Harijan, T Majeed Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy ,Vol.13(4),2009--Pages927931 Abstract: To ensure a sustainable energy future for Pakistan, it is necessary that the energy sector be accorded a high priority. Pakistan remains predominantly reliant on fossil fuels as its primary source of energy. Efforts to reduce reliance on fossil fuels through increasing the share of renewable energy in the energy supply systems have met with little success so far. The barriers to development of renewable energy can be broadly classified as policy and regulatory barriers, institutional barriers, fiscal and financial barriers, market-related barriers, technological barriers and information and social barriers. In this article, an effort has been made to identify the barriers that limit the use of renewable energy technologies in general and with specific reference to Pakistan, and outline the measures to address these barriers. Keywords: Renewable energy; Barriers; Pakistan Citedy By: 74 Assessment of new and renewable energy resources potential and identification of barriers to their significant utilization in Pakistan [PDF] Author: MH Sahir, AH Qureshi Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.12(1),2008--Pages290298 Abstract: The paper presents a review of the assessed potential of the renewable resources and practical limitations to their significant use in the context of present scenarios and future projections of the national energy mix for Pakistan. Solar, wind, biomass and micro hydel resources are likely to play an important role in future; however these should be seen as supplementary resources and not as alternatives. IEP approach and consistent policy instruments are needed for sustainable development of RETs. Keywords: Renewable-potential; Solar-energy; Wind-power; Limitations; Pakistan Citedy By: 64 Status and outlook of solar energy use in Pakistan [PDF] tawanai.com Author: UK Mirza, MM Maroto-Valer, N Ahmad Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.7(6),2003--Pages501514 Abstract: : Pakistan is an energy deficient country, where a large fraction of the population still does not have access to modern day energy services such as electricity. This is due to very limited fossil fuel resources and poor economy, which restrains the import of fossil fuels on a large scale. To overcome energy shortage, Pakistan needs to develop its indigenous energy resources like hydropower, solar and wind. Pakistan lies in an area of one of the highest solar insolation in the world. This vast potential can be exploited to produce electricity, which could be provided to off-grid communities in the northern hilly areas and the southern and western deserts. Applications other than electricity production such as solar water heaters and solar cookers also have vast applications. All this will help in both reducing the import of fossil fuels and dependency of people on fuel wood, which in turn will provide some respite for the dwindling forest reserves of Pakistan. Accordingly, the status and outlook of solar energy use in Pakistan is discussed in this paper. In addition, the role of R&D organizations in the promotion of solar energy technologies in Pakistan is also presented including a description of some proposed projects. It is concluded that the current infrastructure has not been able to advance the status of solar energy of Pakistan. Significant efforts are needed to effectively utilize this cheap renewable energy source. Keywords: energy services electricity northern hilly areas Citedy By: 64 Energy demand in Pakistan: a disaggregate analysis [PDF] uni-muenchen.de Author: MA Khan, U Ahmad Journal: The Pakistan Development Review,Vol.47(4),2009--Pages437-455 Abstract: This study examines the demand for energy at disaggregate level (gas, electricity and coal) for Pakistan over the period 1972-2007. Over main results suggest that electricity and coal consumption responds positively to changes in real income per capita and negatively to changes in domestic price level. The gas consumption responds negatively to real income and price changes in the short-run, however, in the long-run real income exerts positive effect on gas consumption, while domestic price remains insignificant. Furthermore, in the short-run the average elasticities of price and real income for gas consumption (in absolute terms) are greater than that of electricity and coal consumption. The differences in elasticities of each component of energy have significant policy implications for income and revenue generation Keywords: domestic price, energy at disaggregate level, gas, electricity and coal Citedy By: 64 Energy consumption and economic growth in Asian economies: a more comprehensive analysis using panel data [PDF] Author: CC Lee, CP Chang Journal: Resource and energy Economics,Vol.30(1),2008--Pages5065 Abstract: This paper applies the most recently developed panel unit root, heterogeneous panel cointegration and panel-based error correction models to re-investigate co-movement and the causal relationship between energy consumption and real GDP within a multivariate framework that includes capital stock and labor input for 16 Asian countries during the 19712002 period. It employs the production side model (aggregate production function). The empirical results fully support a positive long-run cointegrated relationship between real GDP and energy consumption when the heterogeneous country effect is taken into account. It is found that although economic growth and energy consumption lack short-run causality, there is long-run unidirectional causality running from energy consumption to economic growth. This means that reducing energy consumption does not adversely affect GDP in the short-run but would in the long-run; thus, these countries should adopt a more vigorous energy policy. Furthermore, we broaden the investigation by dividing the sample countries into two cross-regional groups, namely the APEC and ASEAN groups, and even more important results and implications emerge Keywords: Energy consumption; GDP; Asian economies; Panel co-integration; Panel causality Citedy By: 495 Sustainable development in Pakistan in the context of energy consumption demand and environmental degradation [PDF] Author: S Alam, A Fatima, MS Butt Journal: Journal of Asian Economics,Vol.18(5),2007--Pages825837 Abstract: The aim of this paper is to analyze the impact of population growth, economic growth, energy intensity (EI) growth and urbanization growth on environmental degradation in Pakistan. The paper will investigate simultaneously the effect of population growth, urbanization, energy consumption and environmental degradation on the sustainable economic growth as well. To ensure the sustainable development of the economy environmental degradation should not increase with time but be reduced or at least remain constant. If it increases, we will move further away for sustainability, while if it decreases, we will move closer towards it. The results indicate that 1% increase in GDP growth leads to 0.84% increase in growth rate of carbon dioxide emissions, and an increase of 1% in the energy intensity growth rate causes almost 0.24% increases in growth rate of CO2 emissions. As far as results of co-integrating vector normalized on GDP growth is concerned, the coefficients of EI growth and CO2 emissions growth are found to be affecting the level of development significantly and positively by 0.3% and 1.2%, respectively. This indicates that in Pakistan process of economic development is dependent on the level of energy use and the resultant of this energy use, CO2 emissions caused economic growth significantly and positively. In addition to the rapid urbanization and increased population growth affect positively to environmental degradation while negatively and significantly to the economic development in the long run. Keywords: Economic growth; Environmental degradation; CO2 emission; Energy intensity; Urbanization Citedy By: 77 Thermal springs of Pakistan [PDF] Author: MA Bakr Journal: Pakistan Geol. Surv. Rec,Vol.16(),1996--Pages3 Abstract: 3 Country of Publication: United States Language: English Subject: 15 GEOTHERMAL ENERGY; PAKISTAN; HOT SPRINGS; GEOTHERMAL RESOURCES; THERMAL WATERS; ASIA; RESOURCES; THERMAL SPRINGS 150202* -- Geology & Hydrology of Geothermal Keywords: ENERGY; PAKISTAN GEOTHERMAL RESOURCES Citedy By: 14 How to do structural validity of a system dynamics type simulation model: the case of an energy policy model [PDF] academia.edu Author: H Qudrat-Ullah, BS Seong Journal: Energy PolicyVolume,Vol.13(),--Pages3 Abstract: System dynamics based simulation models are becoming increasingly popular in the analysis of important energy policy issues including global warming, deregulation, conservation and efficiency. The usefulness of these models is predicated on their ability to link observable patterns of behavior of a system to micro-level structures. This paper argues that the structural validity of the simulation modelright behavior for the right reasonsis a stringent measure to build confidence in a simulation model regardless of how well the model passes behavior validity tests. That leads to an outline of formal structural validity procedures available but less explored in system dynamics modeling repertoire. An illustration of a set of six tests for structural validity of a system dynamics model for energy policy analysis follows. Then using Theil inequality statistics, the behavior validity of the model is also tested. Finally, some conclusions on the increased appeal for simulation models for energy policy analysis and design are presented. Keywords: Energy; Pakistan; Structural validity Citedy By: 120 Alternate energy resources for pakistan: sustainable solutions for fulfilling energy requirements [PDF] researchgate.net Author: M Shakir, IU Haq, MA Khan, SA Malik Journal: World Applied Sciences Journal ,Vol.31(5),2014--Pages718-723 Abstract: Pakistan has been facing the problem of energy shortages and the problem has deteriorated under successive governments. A burning need of the hour is to devise proper strategy for utilizing the available resources and making Pakistan self-sufficient in energy requirements. Different segments of the society have discussed on the feasible issues and convergence of ideas to work on a joint mechanism with active involvement and support from the government along with guidance from scientists and academia is the way forward to derive a long term sustainable solution. Alternate energy resources have to be introduced at domestic and commercial level thus promoting viable energy efficient solution across the country. Roughly the requirement is around 6000 MW which has to be added to the national grid. With the blatant needs of energy, Pakistan has the right to exercise the use of nuclear energy for meeting its demands and keeping the civil nuclear agreements going on in the world. Many energy sources are environmental friendly, they provide an alternate safe source helping to keep pollution within certain levels as required by the world standards. Coastal areas of Pakistan are a huge resource for utilizing wind energy potential to its maximal level. Pakistan has the potential to generate 3 million megawatts electricity through solar energy. The need of the hour is to build small scale hydro dams in Pakistan since other power generation sources are difficult to be implemented in remote areas. We would explore the available resources for maximal benefit and utilization. Keywords: Alternate Energy Geothermal Hydal Nuclear Renewable Energy Solar Wind Citedy By: 4 Power generation in Pakistan: past trends, current status and future projections [PDF] Author: MA Uqaili, M Mirani, K Harijan Journal: Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology,Vol.23(3),2004--Pages207-216 Abstract: Energy is an essential ingredient of socio-economic development and economic growth. Electricity is the most versatile form of energy and is the key to the modern world. Pakistan is an energy deficient country. The total power generation capacity in the country is of the order of 17.8 GW. About half of the country's population has no access to electricity and per capita electricity supply is only 500 kWh. The conventional electricity generation includes 68.3% thermal (oil, gas and coal), 29.5% hydel and 2.3% nuclear. The electricity generation increased by 8% per year during the last four decades and future demand has been projected to grow at 7-11 % per annum. The hydel electricity generation installed capacity was 240 MW in 1960 with 70% share in total installed capacity mix. It has substantially increased to 5,041 MW in 2003 in absolute terms; however the share in total installed capacity decreased to 28.34%. This paper presents the past trends, current status and future projections for hydel power generation in Pakistan. The study concludes that though the installed capacity of hydel power generation increased at an average rate of about 48% per annum from 1960 to 2003, but its share in total electricity generation mix decreased continuously in the last four decades and projected that its share will also decreases in the future too. The government should take concrete efforts for growth in hydel electricity generation especially small hydro power, to meet increasing power demand, to increase economic independence, to reduce fossil fuel consumption and to protect the environment from pollution resulting from increasing thermal power generation Keywords: Socio-economic, development economic growth, generation capacity, protect the environment Citedy By: 4 Renewable energy resource potential in Pakistan [PDF] Author: MA Sheikh Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.13(9),2009--Pages26962702 Abstract: Pakistan energy situation is seriously troubling today due to lack of careful planning and implementation of its energy policies. To avoid the worse situation in the years ahead, the country will have to exploit its huge natural renewable resource. In this paper a review is being presented about renewable energy resource potential available in the country to be exploited for useful and consistent energy supplies. On average solar global insolation 57 kWh/m2/day, wind speed 57.5 m/s, Biogas 14 million m3/day, microhydel more than 600 MW (for small units) with persistency factor of more than 80% over a year exist in the country. Solar and wind maps are presented along with identification of hot spring sites as resource of geothermal energy. The research results presented in this paper are not only useful for government policy makers, executing agencies but also for private sector national and international agencies and stake holders who want to invest in Pakistan for renewable energy projects or business. Keywords: Renewable energy; Resource data; Solar; Wind; Microhydel; Bio-energy; Geothermal energy Citedy By: 49 A computable general equilibrium model of energy, economy and equity interactions in Pakistan [PDF] Author: F Naqvi Journal: Energy Economics,Vol.4(1),1998--Pages347373 Abstract: This article introduces a computable general equilibrium model of the Pakistan economy. Some major extensions to a standard neoclassical model have been made to capture the interlinkages between economy, energy and equity. The model has been designed mainly to carry out policy oriented short-term studies especially for the energy sector. An illustrative application of the model shows its capability to provide detailed information which are useful in analysis of a policy issue Keywords: Energy; General equilibrium Citedy By: 49 Management of natural gas resources and search for alternative renewable energy resources: A case study of Pakistan [PDF] Author: SN Malik, OR Sukhera Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.16(2),2012--Pages12821290 Abstract: Energy usage in Pakistan has increased rapidly in past few years due to increase in economic growth. Inadequate and inconsistent supply of energy has created pressure on the industrial and commercial sectors of Pakistan and has also affected environment. Demand has already exceeded supply and load shedding has become common phenomenon. Due to excessive consumption of energy resources it would become difficult to meet future energy demands. This necessitates proper management of existing and exploration of new energy resources. Energy resource management is highly dependent on the supply and demand pattern. This paper highlights the future demands, production and supply of energy produced from natural gas based on economic and environmental constraints in Pakistan with special emphasis on management of natural gas. An attempt has been made by proposing a suitable course of action to meet the rising gas demand. A mechanism has been proposed to evaluate Pakistan's future gas demand through quantitative analysis of base, worst and best/chosen option. CO2 emission for all cases has also been evaluated. The potential, constraints and possible solutions to develop alternative renewable energy resources in the country have also been discussed. This work will be fruitful for the decision makers responsible for energy planning of the country. This work is not only helpful for Pakistan but is equally important to other developing countries to manage their energy resources Keywords: Energy planning; Renewable energy resources Citedy By: 21 A clean and permanent energy infrastructure for Pakistan: solar-hydrogen energy system [PDF] Author: N Lutfi, TN Vezirolu Journal: International journal of hydrogen energy,Vol.16(3),1991--Pages169-200 Abstract: A solar-hydrogen energy system has been proposed for Pakistan as the best replacement for the present fossil fuel based energy system. Hydrogen is to be produced via a photovoltaic-electrolysis system, utilizing the available non-agricultural sunny terrain in Baluchistan region. There will be a desalination plant for sea water desalination. The area under the photovoltaic panels with the availability of water would provide suitable environment for growing some cash crops. This would change the vast useless desert land into green productive farms. In order to show the quantitative benefits of the proposed system, future trends of important energy and economical parameters have been studied with and without hydrogen introduction. These included population, energy demand (fossil + hydrogen), energy production (fossil + hydrogen), gross national product, fossil energy imports, world energy prices, environmental savings due to hydrogen introduction, savings due to the higher utilization efficiency of hydrogen, by-product credit, agricultural income, income from hydrogen sale, photovoltaic cell area, total land area, water desalination plant capacity, capital investment, operating and maintenance cost, total income from the system environmental impact and quality of life. The results indicate that adopting the solar-hydrogen energy system would eliminate the import dependency on fossil fuels, increase gross product per capita, reduce pollution, improve quality of life, and establish a permanent and clean energy system. The total annual expenditure for the proposed system is quite small compared to the total income expected. The availability of water, the cast crop production, electricity and hydrogen would result in rapid development of Baluchistan, the largest province of Pakistan Keywords: Solar-hydrogen energy, Pakistan, clean energy Citedy By: 48 Greener energy: issues and challenges for Pakistansolar energy prospective [PDF] psu.edu Author: AW Bhutto, AA Bazmi, G Zahedi Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy ,Vol.16(5),2012--Pages27622780 Abstract: Energy plays a pivotal role in socio-economic development by raising standard of living. It is becoming gradually accepted that current energy systems, networks encompassing every thing from primary energy sources to final energy services, are becoming unsustainable. Development of conventional forms of energy for meeting the growing energy needs of society at a reasonable cost is the responsibility of the Governments. In recent years, public and political sensitivities to environmental issues and energy security have led to the promotion of renewable energy resources. Diversification of fuel sources is imperative to address these issues; and limited fossil resources and environmental problems associated with them have emphasized the need for new sustainable energy supply options that use renewable energies. Development and promotion of new non-conventional, alternate and renewable sources of energy such as solar, wind and bio-energy, etc. are now getting sustained attention. Solar power is one of the hottest areas in energy investment right now, but there is much debate about the future of solar technology and solar energy markets. This investigates the progress and challenges for solar power in Pakistan according to the overall concept of sustainable development, and identifies the region wise potential of solar power in Pakistan and its current status. Barriers are examined over the whole solar energy spectrum and policy issues and institutional roles and responsibilities are discussed Keywords: Green energy; Solar energy; Sustainable development; Pakistan Citedy By: 48 The dynamics of electricity consumption and economic growth: A revisit study of their causality in Pakistan [PDF] esearchgate.net Author: M Shahbaz, HH Lean Journal: Energy,Vol.39(1),2012--Pages146153 Abstract: This study revisits the relationship between electricity consumption and economic growth in Pakistan by controlling and investigating the effects of two major production factors capital and labor. The empirical evidence confirms the cointegration among the variables and indicates that electricity consumption has a positive effect on economic growth. Moreover, bi-directional Granger causality between electricity consumption and economic growth has been found. The finding suggests that adoption of electricity conservation policies to conserve energy resources may unwittingly decline economic growth and the lower growth rate will in turn further decrease the demand for electricity. Therefore, government contemplating such conservationist policies should instead explore and develop alternate sources of energy as a strategy rather than just increasing electricity production per se in order to meet the rising demand for electricity in their quest towards sustaining development in the country Keywords: Electricity consumption; Economic growth; Granger causality Citedy By: 125 An evaluation of wind energy potential at Kati Bandar, Pakistan [PDF] Author: I Ullah, AJ Chipperfield Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.14(2),2010--Pages856861 Abstract: As a developing nation of energy-starved people, Pakistan urgently needs new sources of affordable, clean energy. Wind energy is potentially attractive because of its low environmental impact and sustainability. This work aims to investigate the wind power production potential of sites in south-eastern Pakistan. Wind speed data measured over a one-year period at a typical site on the south-east coast of Pakistan are presented. Frequency distributions of wind speed and wind power densities at three heights, seasonal variations of speed, and estimates of power likely to be produced by commercial turbines are included. The site investigated is found to be a class 4 wind power site with annual average wind speed of 7.16 m/s and power density of 414 W/m2 at 50 m height. The site is, therefore, likely to be suitable for wind farms as well as small, stand-alone systems Keywords: Wind energy; Wind resource evaluation; Pakistan wind sites Citedy By: 36 The energy supply situation in the rural sector of Pakistan and the potential of renewable energy technologies [PDF] Author: MA Ghaffar - Renewable Journal: Renewable energy,Vol.16(8),1995--Pages941-976 Abstract: Renewable energy, Volume 6, Issue 8, November 1995, Pages 941-976- Elsevier Abstract: Pakistan has few energy resources and the country is heavily dependent on the import of fossil fuel. More than 20% of foreign exchange earnings is spent on oil imports every year. The urban population has access to commercial energy sources but the rural population consumes wood, animal and crop waste for its domestic energy needs. Interest in renewables as part of national energy supplies is growing. Among renewables, biogas and solar energy receive more attention because of their good resource potential. Renewables, especially biogas and solar energy, could supply energy for various applications and thus raise the living standards of the people Keywords: energy resources, national energy supplies, biogas Citedy By: 28 Environmental Kuznets curve and the role of energy consumption in Pakistan [PDF] mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de Author: S Muhammad, HH Lean, SS Muhammad Journal: Munich Personal RePEc Archive (MPRA Paper No. 34929),Vol.(),2011--Pages Abstract: The paper is an effort to fill the gap in the energy literature with a comprehensive country study for Pakistan. We investigate the relationship between CO2 emissions, energy consumption, economic growth and trade openness for Pakistan over the period of 1971- 2009. Bounds test for cointegration and Granger causality test are employed for the empirical analysis. The result suggests that there exists long-run relationship among the variables and the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) hypothesis is supported. The significant existence of EKC shows the country's effort to condense CO2 emissions and indicates a reasonable achievement of controlling environmental degradation in Pakistan. Furthermore, we find oneway causal relationship running from income to CO2 emissions. Energy consumption increases CO2 emissions both in the short and long runs. Trade openness reduces CO2 emissions in the long run but it is insignificant in the short run. In addition, the change in CO2 emissions from short run to the long span of time is corrected by about 10 percent each year Keywords: CO2 emissions, energy consumption, trade openness Citedy By: 43 An assessment of renewable energy potential for electricity generation in Pakistan [PDF] Author: MK Farooq, S Kumar Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy ,Vol.20(),2013--Pages240254 Abstract: Renewable energy for power generation is gaining attention around the world, and for Pakistan, these resources can fulfill the present and future energy demands of the country. Though the potential of renewable energy resources has been assessed in earlier studies, their assessment did not consider the most promising technologies. Moreover, their estimation was static and the future renewable resource potential was not estimated. This study estimates the current and future potential of renewable energy sources for power generation by employing most promising technologies. The technical potential of solar energy from solar photovoltaic and parabolic trough thermal technologies for power generation is estimated to be 149 GW in 2010 and 169 GW in 2050. The suitable area for wind energy generation is available for the capacity installation of 13 GW. The potential from biomass energy sources is 5 GW in 2010 and could be 15 GW in 2050. Small hydro installed capacity under current circumstances can reach 3 GW installed capacity. The current national plans are resulting in exploitation of wind and small hydro plants, but a large technical potential of solar and biomass technologies also exists. The study results clearly demonstrate that renewable energy sources can supplement the energy needs of Pakistan and can provide a sustainable energy base. Keywords: Geographical potential; Technical potential; Renewable energy sources; Pakistan; Electricity Citedy By: 0 The energy demand in the manufacturing sector of Pakistan: some further results [PDF] bilkent.edu.tr Author: SF Mahmud Journal: Energy Economics,Vol.22(6),2000--Pages641648 Abstract: The purpose of this study was to re-examine the role of energy in the manufacturing sector of Pakistan using a Partial Equilibrium Approach. GL restricted cost function along with the factor demand equations were estimated using Zellners iterative procedure. Higher energy prices do not seem to adversely affect investment in capital. Substitution possibilities between energy and non-energy inputs are very limited and therefore energy price hikes may directly affect the cost of production. Inter-fuel cross price elasticities indicate that there are substitution possibilities between electricity and gas Keywords: Energy; Manufacturing; Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Environmental Kuznets curve for carbon emissions in Pakistan: an empirical investigation [PDF] Author: M Nasir, FU Rehman Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.39(3),2011--Pages18571864 Abstract: This study investigates the relationship between carbon emissions, income, energy consumption, and foreign trade in Pakistan for the period 19722008. By employing the Johansen method of cointegration, the study finds that there is a quadratic long-run relationship between carbon emissions and income, confirming the existence of Environmental Kuznets Curve for Pakistan. Moreover, both energy consumption and foreign trade are found to have positive effects on emissions. The short-run results have, however, denied the existence of the Environmental Kuznets Curve. The short-run results are unique to the existing literature in the sense that none of the long-run determinants of emissions is significant. The contradictory results of short- and long-run give policy makers the opportunity to formulate different types of growth policies for the two terms taking environmental issues into consideration. In addition, the uni-directional causality from growth to energy consumption suggests that the policy makers should not only focus on forecasting future demand for energy with different growth scenarios but also on obtaining the least cost energy. Furthermore, the absence of causality from emissions to growth suggests that Pakistan can curb its carbon emissions without disturbing its economic growth. Keywords: Energy Policy, Environmental Kuznets , growth policies, environmental issues Citedy By: 0 Environmental Kuznets curve for carbon emissions in Pakistan: an empirical investigation [PDF] Author: M Nasir, FU Rehman Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.39(3),2011--Pages18571864 Abstract: This study investigates the relationship between carbon emissions, income, energy consumption, and foreign trade in Pakistan for the period 19722008. By employing the Johansen method of cointegration, the study finds that there is a quadratic long-run relationship between carbon emissions and income, confirming the existence of Environmental Kuznets Curve for Pakistan. Moreover, both energy consumption and foreign trade are found to have positive effects on emissions. The short-run results have, however, denied the existence of the Environmental Kuznets Curve. The short-run results are unique to the existing literature in the sense that none of the long-run determinants of emissions is significant. The contradictory results of short- and long-run give policy makers the opportunity to formulate different types of growth policies for the two terms taking environmental issues into consideration. In addition, the uni-directional causality from growth to energy consumption suggests that the policy makers should not only focus on forecasting future demand for energy with different growth scenarios but also on obtaining the least cost energy. Furthermore, the absence of causality from emissions to growth suggests that Pakistan can curb its carbon emissions without disturbing its economic growth. Keywords: Energy Policy, Environmental Kuznets , growth policies, environmental issues Citedy By: 0 Energy geopolitics and IranPakistanIndia gas pipeline [PDF] Author: SK Verma Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.35(6),2007--Pages32803301 Abstract: With the growing energy demands in India and its neighboring countries, IranPakistanIndia (IPI) gas pipeline assumes special significance. Energy-deficient countries such as India, China, and Pakistan are vying to acquire gas fields in different parts of the world. This has led to two conspicuous developments: first, they are competing against each other and secondly, a situation is emerging where they might have to confront the US and the western countries in the near future in their attempt to control energy bases. The proposed IPI pipeline is an attempt to acquire such base. However, Pakistan is playing its own game to maximize its leverages. Pakistan, which refuses to establish even normal trading ties with India, craves to earn hundreds of millions of dollars in transit fees and other annual royalties from a gas pipeline which runs from Iran's South Pars fields to Barmer in western India. Pakistan promises to subsidize its gas imports from Iran and thus also become a major forex earner. It is willing to give pipeline related international guarantees notwithstanding its record of covert actions in breach of international law (such as the export of terrorism) and its reluctance to reciprocally provide India what World Trade Organization (WTO) rules obligate it to doMost Favored Nation (MFN) status. India is looking at the possibility of using some set of norms for securing gas supply through pipeline as the European Union has already initiated a discussion on the issue. The key point that is relevant to India's plan to build a pipeline to source gas from Iran relates to national treatment for pipeline. Under the principle of national treatment which also figures in relation to foreign direct investment (FDI), the country through which a pipeline transits should provide some level of security to the transiting pipeline as it would have provided to its domestic pipelines. This paper will endeavor to analyze, first, the significance of this pipeline for India and then the geopolitics involved in it. Keywords: Geopolitics; WTO; gas Pipeline Citedy By: 43 Energy substitution in Pakistan's manufacturing [PDF] Author: S CHISHTI, F MAHMUD Journal: Pakistan Economic and Social Review,Vol.26(1),1988--Pages57-64 Abstract: The demand for energy in Pakistan's industrial sector has been growing at an annual rate of 6.3%. The sector uses about 30% of the commercial energy out of which gas accounts for 38% and electricity 30%. The composition of demand in terms of different energy carriers has been changing. Also the intensity of production has also been increasing. As a result gap between potential demand and supply is widening. Unless strides are made to optimize the production and use of energy, Pakistan is likely to face serious crises in future. The main purpose of the study is to estimate the substitution elasticities between energy and non energy inputs in the manufacturing sector of Pakistan. This analysis is at the firm level Keywords: Price elasticity, Energy, Prices, Cements, Manufacturing industries, Rayon Production functions, Cost functions, Demand Citedy By: 5 Recent progress in renewable energyRemedy of energy crisis in Pakistan [PDF] Author: AB Awan, ZA Khan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.33(),2014--Pages236253 Abstract: Energy plays a pivotal role for the economic development of a country. A reliable source of energy is needed to improve the living standard of people. Today, industrial progress plays a vital role in the development of any country but the industrial progress depends on reliable supply of electricity. However, Pakistan is passing through an energy crisis that is seriously affecting the lives of people. The main reason for the energy crisis is rapidly increasing the prices of hydro-carbon resources and lack of planning to foresee the increasing energy demand in the country. Renewable energy (RE) can play an important role to minimize this crisis. Besides the depletion of fossil fuel, the accumulation of their emissions has catastrophic effects on our environment. Modern civilizations are more curious about environmental cleanliness. Environmental pollution is supposed to be a serious threat to the life on our planet. Our earth could heat up by several degrees in future if we do not stop using non-renewable energy resources. In this article, the exiting production of renewable energy through different RE technologies is discussed and the potential capacity of production of energy through these technologies in Pakistan is studied. Some suggestions are also proposed to increase the RE share in the energy mix of the country Keywords: Renewable energy; Solar energy; Wind energy; Micro-hydel; Bio-fuel; Bio mass; Energy crisis Citedy By: 42 Climatic variations in comfortable temperatures: the Pakistan projects [PDF] academia.edu Author: JF Nicol, IA Raja, A Allaudin, GN Jamy Journal: Energy and buildings,Vol.30(3),1999--Pages261279 Abstract: Two thermal comfort surveys in Pakistan are described. One was longitudinal conducted in summer and winter, the other was transverse with monthly surveys over a whole year. The surveys were conducted in five cities each representing a particular climatic region. The use of building controls and clothing is analysed. There is close agreement between the findings of the two surveys despite differences in methodology. The surveys show that there is a definite relationship between indoor comfort and outdoor conditions in line with an adaptive approach to thermal comfort. The current International Standard does not accurately reflect these. Because of the large variations in indoor temperature in many Pakistani buildings, the surveys also indicate the limits of people's ability to adapt to indoor temperatures. Keywords: Thermal comfort; Field survey; Longitudinal survey; Transverse survey; Adaptive model; Temperature standards Citedy By: 225 The demand for energy in the large-scale manufacturing sector of Pakistan [PDF] Author: F Mahmud, S Chishti Journal: Energy Economics,Vol.12(4),1990--Pages251-254 Abstract: The extent of interfuel substitution, as well as substitution between energy and non-energy inputs, in the large-scale manufacturing sector of Pakistan has been examined. The model has been estimated in two stages. In the first stage input demand for various energy components is estimated and hence an aggregate Divisia index is constructed. In the second stage this index is used as an instrument to estimate aggregate input demand for capital, labour and energy along with their price and substitution elasticities. It seems that there is little interfuel substitution. The results also show that energy and labour are substitutes while energy and capital are complement. Keywords: Energy, Manufacturing, Pakistan Citedy By: 25 Prospects of renewable energy sources in Pakistan [PDF] comsats.org Author: NA Zaigham, Z Nayyar Journal: Energy Technologies and Sustainable ,Vol.(),2005--Pages Abstract: Professor & Director Institute of Environmental Studies, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan Lecturer Department of Applied Physics, University of Karachi Karachi, Pakistan Pakistan, despite the enormous potential of its energy resources, remains energy- deficient and has to rely heavily on imports to satisfy its needs. Moreover, a very large part of the rural areas does not have the electrification facilities, because they are either too remote and/or too expensive to connect to the national grid. Pakistan obtains its energy requirements from a variety of traditional and commercial sources. Share of various primary energy-sources in energy-supply mix remained during last few years as oil: 43.5%, gas: 41.5%, LPG: 0.3%, coal: 4.5%, hydro-electricity: 9.2%, and nuclear electricity: 1.1%. The electric-power generation included 71.9% thermal, 25.2% hydel and 2.9% nuclear. While there is no prospect for Pakistan to reach self-sufficiency in hydrocarbons, a good option is the exploitation and utilization of the huge coal-reserves of Thar and the other renewable energy sources. Pakistan has wide spectrum of high potential renewable energy sources, conventional as well as non-conventional, which have not been adequately explored, exploited and developed. Thus, the primary energy supplies today are not enough to meet even the present demand. So, Pakistan, like other developing countries of the region, is facing a serious challenge of energy deficit. The development of the renewable energy sources can play an important role in meeting this challenge. Present observations, based on reviewing the geological setup, geographical position, climatological cycles and the agricultural/industrial/ urbanization activities, reveal that there are bright prospects for the exploitation of various renewable-energy sources, which include mega & macro/micro-hydel, biomass, biogas, wind, solar, co-generation, city and other solid wastes, utilization of low-head canal levels, sea wave & tide and geothermal energies etc. Technologically, all these renewable-energy sources are viable and consequently suited to efforts for poverty alleviation and cleaner environment in Pakistan. The country can be benefited by harnessing these options of energy-generation as substitute energy in areas where sources exist. As Pakistan is an agricultural country and major part of its population lives in the rural areas, the electricity generated by renewable sources will also improve rural life, thereby reducing the urban migration that is taxing the ability of cities to cope with their own environmental problems Keywords: Energy Technologies and Sustainable Citedy By: 33 Exercising multidisciplinary approach to assess interrelationship between energy use, carbon emission and land use change in a metropolitan city of Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: G Ali, V Nitivattananon Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.16(1),2012--Pages775786 Abstract: Population of two cities in Pakistan has already crossed the 10-million figure and for the rest of the areas in the country populations are also increasing rapidly. Urbanization has boosted the use of energy in the cities and so is greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions but the ground situation as to the extent, vulnerability, past trends and future scenarios are not unveiled for the cities of Pakistan. Dearth of data in Pakistan is a huge hindrance to the investigation of energy use and actual GHG emissions. We dared to take steps in addressing this case and put preliminary efforts in compiling baseline sectoral breakdown of energy use, carbon emission and land cover/land use. Furthermore, the relationship of CO2 source and sink is also explored. This study mainly tries to achieve three objectives. The results illustrate that industrial and residential sectors are vibrant consumers of energy and CO2 emitters among all other sectors of the city. Sparse trees in the city and reduced agriculture areas by more than one-half in 2009 compared with those in 1975 are the main reasons for increased energy use and reduced CO2emissions from agriculture sector as well. However, all the other sectors have increased their CO2 emissions in an escalating trend. The forecast analysis portrays the same trend too. Therefore, there is a need to make policy makers recognize such vulnerable situation of energy use and GHG emissions for them to take proper and timely actions to cope with the threats of climate change which can occur anytime in the very near future Keywords: CO2 emissions; Sinksource relationship; Multidisciplinary approach; Remote sensing Citedy By: 45 Substitution of labour, capital and energy in the manufacturing sector of Pakistan [PDF] Author: M Iqbal Journal: Empirical Economics,Vol.11(2),1986--Pages8195 Abstract: Share equations of labour, capital, energy and fuel types, derived from translog cost functions, are estimated by Zellner iterative method to obtain elasticities of labour, capital, energy and fuel types and elasticities of substitution between them. Labour, capital and energy appear as substitutes, natural gas and electricity as complements, and other fuels as substitutes. Keywords: labour, capital and energy Citedy By: 34 Bivariate cointegration between energy consumption and development factors: a case study of Pakistan [PDF] Author: K Zaman, MM Khan, Z Saleem Journal: Journal of Green Energy,Vol.8(8),2011--Pages Abstract: The relationship between total energy consumption and economic growth has been extensively explored in the past, but relatively few researchers have examined the increasing trend of energy consumption and development policies of a developing country like Pakistan as well as direction of causation of this relationship that remains controversial. The objective of this paper is to empirically investigate four alternatives but equally plausible hypotheses. These are as follows: (i) development factors cause total primary energy consumption, (ii) energy consumption cause development factors, (iii) there is a bidirectional causality between the two variables, and (iv) both variables are causality independent. To investigate the relationship between the two variables set, a time series cointegration and Granger causality tests have been employed separately. Secondary data pertaining to Pakistan from 1980 to 2009 has been used for analysis. The empirical result of causality strongly supports the bidirectional relationship between carbon dioxide emission and energy demand and industrialization and energy demand. There is a unidirectional causality relationship between the energy demand and population growth. However, neither agriculture value addition nor energy demand affect each other. Keywords: Energy consumption, Carbon dioxide emission, Industry value added, Agriculture value added, Population growth, Cointegration, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Electrical energy crisis in Pakistan and their possible solutions [PDF] Author: MA Javaid, S Hussain, A Maqsood Journal: Journal of Basic & Applied Sciences ,Vol.11(5),2011--Pages Abstract: This work presents the dilemma of shortfall in the supply of electrical energy that is currently faced by Pakistan. The root cause of this shortage in the supply of energy is mentioned in this work. An abridged history as well as the present situation of the electricity production and its consumption in the country is discussed. The electricity generation potential of Pakistan in different sectors to produce energy is viewed. The importance of utilization of coal resources and water resources for the production of electric power is discussed. Pakistan has been blessed with rich and vast renewable energy (RE) resources. These renewable energy resources can play effective and considerable role in contributing towards energy security and energy independence of the country. Some predictions are made on the basis of empirical data and preliminary observations. An estimated forecast of demand and supply of electricity for the next twenty years is also projected in this article Keywords: Electrical Power energy, energy crisis, electricity generation, renewable energy resources Citedy By: 0 Time series models to simulate and forecast hourly averaged wind speed in Quetta, Pakistan [PDF] Author: L Kamal, YZ Jafri Journal: Solar Energy,Vol.61(1),1999--Pages23-32 Abstract: Stochastic simulation and forecast models of hourly average wind speeds are presented. Time series models take into account several basic features of wind speed data including autocorrelation, non-Gaussian distribution and diurnal nonstationarity. The positive correlation between consecutive wind speed observations is taken into account by flitting an ARMA (p,q) process to wind speed data transformed to make their distribution approximately Gaussian and standardized to remove scattering of transformed data. Diurnal variations have been taken into account to observe forecasts and its dependence on lead times. We find the ARMA (p,q) model suitable for prediction intervals and probability forecasts. Keywords: Autocorrelation, Non-Gaussian, Probability forecasts Citedy By: 234 Does renewable energy consumption add in economic growth? An application of auto-regressive distributed lag model in Pakistan [PDF] esearchgate.net Author: M Shahbaz, N Loganathan, M Zeshan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy ,Vol.44(),2015--Pages576585 Abstract: The objective of the study is to examine the relationship between renewable energy consumption and economic growth by incorporating capital and labour as potential determinants of production function in case of Pakistan. This study used auto-regressive distributed lag (ARDL) model and rolling window approach (RWA) for cointegration in context of Pakistan. The study used quarterly data over the period of 1972Q12011Q4. The causality analysis applied through VECM Granger causality and innovative accounting approaches. The results reveal that all the variables in the study are cointegrated that shows the long run relationship between the variables. Furthermore, renewable energy consumption, capital and labour boost economic growth. The causality analysis shows the feedback effect between economic growth and renewable energy consumption Keywords: Renewable energy; Economic growth; Pakistan, auto-regressive Citedy By: 28 Energy requirement and economic analysis of rice production in western part of Pakistan [PDF] Author: MA Khan, IU Awan, J Zafar Journal: Soil and Environment (Pakistan,Vol.28(1),2009--Pages60-67 Abstract: This study examines energy use pattern and the relationship between energy inputs and rice production in Dera Ismail Khan, District of Pakistan. The information used in this study were based on cross-sectional data collected from growers by using face-to-face interviews. The sample farms were selected through a stratified sampling technique. The results revealed that energy consumption and rice yield were 5,756 kWh and 3.23 tones per hectare on Bullock Operated Farms (BOF) and 11,162 kWh and 4.12 tones per hectare on Tractor Operated Farms (TOF). Consumption of animate energy on BOF was more than TOF due to heavy use of animate energy in land preparation operation. Result also showed that energy efficiency i.e. output-input ratio on BOF (6.32) was higher than TOF (4.16). Cost of production remained lower on BOF than TOF, however, the yield and consequently crop values and net return were higher on TOF than BOF. It was concluded that increase in energy consumption at farm level increased yield of rice, hence the farmers with higher cost of production could get better return of their crop Keywords: Economic analysis, energy consumption, Oryza sativa, production economics, Pakistan Citedy By: 19 Empirical models for the correlation of monthly average daily global solar radiation with hours of sunshine on a horizontal surface at Karachi, Pakistan [PDF] journals.tubitak.gov.tr Author: F Ahmed, I Ulfat Journal: Turkish Journal of Physics,Vol.(),2004--Pages Abstract: A new set of constants for Angstrom-type correlation of first and second order, to estimate monthly average daily global solar radiation, has been obtained employing sunshine hours data recorded at Karachi, Pakistan (Lat. 24 540 N, Long. 67 080 E). Least square regression is performed to derive these constants. The correlation equations developed are employed to calculate the monthly average daily global solar radiation. These results are then compared with various other existing correlations and the measured data. Excellent agreement has been found between the estimated and the measured values. Keywords: daily global solar radiation, Least square regression Citedy By: 71 ] Baloch nationalism and the geopolitics of energy resources: The changing context of separatism in Pakistan [PDF] dtic.mil Author: RG Wirsing Journal: books.google.com,Vol.(),2005--Pages Abstract: This monograph examines the Baloch separatist insurgency that has resurfaced in recent years in Pakistan's sprawling Balochistan province. The author maintains that the context of today's insurgency differs in certain important respects from that of its 1970s Keywords: Pakistan's sprawling, Balochistan Citedy By: 35 Towards a new measurement of energy poverty: A cross-community analysis of rural Pakistan [PDF] maastrichtuniversity.nl Author: B Mirza, E Szirmai Journal: UNU-MERIT Working Papers 2010 ,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: Most rural households in Pakistan remain in a state of energy poverty. They use a variety of non-conventional energy sources, including traditional biomass (firewood, animal and plant waste), kerosene and even LPG. A specially designed Energy Poverty Survey (EPS), carried out in rural Pakistan from December 2008 till January 2009, showed that rural households use different combinations of energy sources (the energy mix). This paper analyses the characteristics and consequences of the different energy mixes, used by richer and poorer rural households. Using data from the EPS, we develop a composite index to measure the degree of Energy Poverty among rural households. This index takes into account the inconvenience for the household associated with the use of different sources of energy, as well as its energy shortfall and takes household size into account. In our results, we found that 23.1% of rural households experience high degrees of energy inconveniences, spending ample amount of their time and effort in collecting or buying different energy sources. Next, using the standard conversion units to convert different energy sources into kilowatt hours, we found that 96.6% rural households experience severe energy shortfalls. Our new and inclusive measure of energy poverty which combines the energy inconveniences and the energy shortfalls, reveals that 91.7% of all rural households in Punjab province of Pakistan are in the state of severe energy poverty Keywords: energy access; energy poverty measurement; energy indicators; energy inconvenience index; energy poverty index Citedy By: 32 Prospects of renewables penetration in the energy mix of Pakistan [PDF] Author: SZ Farooqui Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.29(),2014--Pages693700 Abstract: Pakistan is the sixth most populous country of the world comprising 2.56% of the total global population. However, it ranks 37th in the energy consumption, at 0.37% of the world total. The per capita energy availability is only 43 W, which is 1/7th of the world average. The greatest reason for such a huge energy deficiency is its heavy dependence on imported oil for power generation. The country is however, rich in renewable energy sources and has vast potential for their exploitation. In this article, a survey of the availability of various renewable energy sources, including hydel, solar, wind and biomass, and their current and future penetration prospects in the total energy mix have been carried out, with some recommendations. It is estimated that Pakistan has the feasible potential of 30 GW of installed power capacity from hydel and 50 GW of installed capacity from wind by 2030 Keywords: Pakistans energy; Energy mix; Renewable energy; Wind energy; Solar energy; Biomass Citedy By: 29 Solar and wind energy potential and utilization in Pakistan [PDF] Author: IA Raja, RS Abro Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.5(1-4),1994--Pages583-586 Abstract: Pakistan needs substantial amount of energy to develop its industry and to increase the agricultural productivity. The available indigenous energy resources are limited. The only option which the country has to pursue is renewable energy. This paper identifies the potentials of solar and wind energy. The prime sites for wind are coastal area, arid zone and hill terrains. Solar energy is abundant over most part of the country, maximum being received over Quetta valley. Keywords: Solar energy, Wind energy, Energy conservation, Renewable energy, Clean energy resources Citedy By: 21 Relationship between financial leverage and financial performance: Evidence from fuel & energy sector of Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: S Akhtar, B Javed, A Maryam, H Sadia Journal: European Journal of Business & Management,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: Fuel and energy sector serves as the backbone of the economy. The segment provides support, not only for the economic development of the country by showing positive trends towards the sectoral growth, but also serves as a steering wheel for the growth of manufacturing, trading and service sector. It provides significant inputs for production, trade and service. A general concept prevails that the financial leverage is helpful to enhance the financial performance of the companies. For measuring the impact of financial leverage on the financial health of the companies, it is essential to know whether a positive relationship exists between the financial leverage and financial performance or not? So, this study is intended to test the hypothesis and to measure a relationship between the financial leverage and the financial performance of the fuel and energy sector in Pakistan. The paper also examines the generalization that firms with higher profitability may choose high leverage by using various statistical tools. The findings of the study show a positive relationship between the financial leverage and the financial performance of the companies by accepting the alternate hypothesis H1 and Ho is rejected. The results of the study confirm that the firms having higher profitability may improve their financial performance by having high levels of financial leverage. The study provides evidence by evaluating different facts. It reveals that the players of the fuel and energy in Pakistan can improve at their financial performance by employing the financial leverage and can arrive at a sustainable future growth by making vital decisions about the choice of their optimal capital structure. Keywords: Financial leverage, Firms Performance, Key Indicators- Financial Ratios, Fuel and Energy Sector in Pakistan Citedy By: 29 Relationship between financial leverage and financial performance: Evidence from fuel & energy sector of Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: S Akhtar, B Javed, A Maryam, H Sadia Journal: European Journal of Business & Management,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: Fuel and energy sector serves as the backbone of the economy. The segment provides support, not only for the economic development of the country by showing positive trends towards the sectoral growth, but also serves as a steering wheel for the growth of manufacturing, trading and service sector. It provides significant inputs for production, trade and service. A general concept prevails that the financial leverage is helpful to enhance the financial performance of the companies. For measuring the impact of financial leverage on the financial health of the companies, it is essential to know whether a positive relationship exists between the financial leverage and financial performance or not? So, this study is intended to test the hypothesis and to measure a relationship between the financial leverage and the financial performance of the fuel and energy sector in Pakistan. The paper also examines the generalization that firms with higher profitability may choose high leverage by using various statistical tools. The findings of the study show a positive relationship between the financial leverage and the financial performance of the companies by accepting the alternate hypothesis H1 and Ho is rejected. The results of the study confirm that the firms having higher profitability may improve their financial performance by having high levels of financial leverage. The study provides evidence by evaluating different facts. It reveals that the players of the fuel and energy in Pakistan can improve at their financial performance by employing the financial leverage and can arrive at a sustainable future growth by making vital decisions about the choice of their optimal capital structure. Keywords: Financial leverage, Firms Performance, Key Indicators- Financial Ratios, Fuel and Energy Sector in Pakistan Citedy By: 29 The relationship between electricity consumption, electricity prices and GDP in Pakistan [PDF] Author: F Jamil, E Ahmad Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: This study analyzes the relationship among electricity consumption, its price and real GDP at the aggregate and sectoral level in Pakistan. Using annual data for the period 19602008, the study finds the presence of unidirectional causality from real economic activity to electricity consumption. In particular, growth in output in commercial, manufacturing and agricultural sectors tend to increase electricity consumption, while in residential sector, growth in private expenditures is the cause of rising electricity consumption. The study concludes that electricity production and management needs to be better integrated with overall economic planning exercises. This is essential to avoid electricity shortfalls and unplanned load shedding. Keywords: Cointegration, Electricity, VECM Citedy By: 131 Energy conservation policies, growth and trade performance: Evidence of feedback hypothesis in Pakistan [PDF] Author: SA Raza, M Shahbaz, DK Nguyen Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.38(10),2010--Pages60166025 Abstract: This study analyzes the relationship among electricity consumption, its price and real GDP at the aggregate and sectoral level in Pakistan. Using annual data for the period 19602008, the study finds the presence of unidirectional causality from real economic activity to electricity consumption. In particular, growth in output in commercial, manufacturing and agricultural sectors tend to increase electricity consumption, while in residential sector, growth in private expenditures is the cause of rising electricity consumption. The study concludes that electricity production and management needs to be better integrated with overall economic planning exercises. This is essential to avoid electricity shortfalls and unplanned load shedding Keywords: Cointegration; Electricity; VECM Citedy By: 34 The cost of unserved energy: evidence from selected industrial cities of Pakistan [PDF] Author: R Siddiqui, HH Jalil, M Nasir, WS Malik Journal: The Pakistan Development Review,Vol.47(3),2008--Pages227-246 Abstract: This study is an attempt to explore the cost of unserved energy due to power outages in Pakistan that started in 2007. The study is based on a survey conducted for four major industrial cities of PunjabGujrat, Faisalabad, Gujranwala, and Sialkot. In addition to quantification of output losses, the effect on employment, cost of production, and delay in supply orders are also examined. The output loss is quantified using two-dimensional analyses, controlling for variations in the duration of outages and in the shift hours. The survey data reveal that employment has not suffered any significant drop due to alternative energy arrangements. These arrangements, nevertheless, have increased the production cost of the firms. Delays in the delivery of supply orders are also due to energy shortage. The study reports that the total industrial output loss varies between 12 percent and 37 percent, with Punjab as the major affected province. In the two dimensional analysis resulting in nine scenarios for each province, the ranges of losses in billion Rs are 132-400, 109-331, 17-54 and 11-34 for Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan respectively. The overall industrial sector loss in volume ranges between 269-819 billion rupees. In the overall analysis, food and beverages, textile, and chemical product industries are respectively the top three industries on the scale of losses. However, in terms of percentages, the pottery and ceramic industry is the industry that suffered the most Keywords: energy shortage, energy evidence Citedy By: 28 RETRACTED: Causal links between greenhouse gas emissions, economic growth and energy consumption in Pakistan: A fatal disorder of society [PDF] URL Author: MA Khan, MZ Khan, K Zaman, MM Khan, H Zahoor Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.25(0),2013--Pages166-176 Abstract: Many chemical compounds found in the Earth's atmosphere act as greenhouse gases. These gases allow sunlight to enter the atmosphere freely. When sunlight strikes the Earth's surface, some of it is reflected back towards space as infrared radiation (heat). Greenhouse Keywords: sunlight strikes, energy consumption in Pakistan Citedy By: 26 Energy Crisis in Pakistan: Origins, Challenges, and Sustainable Solutions [PDF] ideas.repec.org Author: M Asif OUP Journal: Catalogue,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: The book primarily aims to educate various stakeholders of society (i.e. policy and decision makers, energy circles, academia, business community, NGOs and civil society) on the subject of energy, particularly in the wider context of the energy crisis facing Pakistan. In a global perspective, it presents an account of the key dimensions of energy in the modern age. Having discussed the energy challenges facing Pakistan, the book provides recommendations and policy guidelines to achieve energy prosperity in the country. It has a holistic, yet easy to follow approach. It presents a coherent blend of the technical and the social aspects of energy. Using appealing diagrams and data presentations, it explains the subject in a reader-friendly way. Referring to examples and citing case studies from developed as well as developing countries it offers plenty of food for thought to its audience. The foreword to the book has been written by Dr Muhammad Yunus, the winner of the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize. Keywords: Energy Crisis, developing countries, Energy Crisis in Pakistan, energy challenges facing Pakistan Citedy By: 23 Does renewable energy consumption add in economic growth? An application of auto-regressive distributed lag model in Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: M Shahbaz, N Loganathan, M Zeshan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Volume,Vol.44(0),2015--Pages 576-585 Abstract: The objective of the study is to examine the relationship between renewable energy consumption and economic growth by incorporating capital and labour as potential determinants of production function in case of Pakistan. This study used auto-regressive distributed lag (ARDL) model and rolling window approach (RWA) for cointegration in context of Pakistan. The study used quarterly data over the period of 1972Q12011Q4. The causality analysis applied through VECM Granger causality and innovative accounting approaches. The results reveal that all the variables in the study are cointegrated that shows the long run relationship between the variables. Furthermore, renewable energy consumption, capital and labour boost economic growth. The causality analysis shows the feedback effect between economic growth and renewable energy consumption. Keywords: Renewable energy; Economic growth; Pakistan, auto-regressive Citedy By: 28 Energy requirement and economic analysis of rice production in western part of Pakistan [PDF] agris.fao.org Author: MA Khan, IU Awan, J Zafar Journal: Soil and Environment (Pakistan),Vol.28(1),2009--Pages60-67 Abstract: This study examines energy use pattern and the relationship between energy inputs and rice production in Dera Ismail Khan, District of Pakistan. The information used in this study were based on cross-sectional data collected from growers by using face-to-face interviews. The sample farms were selected through a stratified sampling technique. The results revealed that energy consumption and rice yield were 5,756 kWh and 3.23 tones per hectare on Bullock Operated Farms (BOF) and 11,162 kWh and 4.12 tones per hectare on Tractor Operated Farms (TOF). Consumption of animate energy on BOF was more than TOF due to heavy use of animate energy in land preparation operation. Result also showed that energy efficiency i.e. output-input ratio on BOF (6.32) was higher than TOF (4.16). Cost of production remained lower on BOF than TOF, however, the yield and consequently crop values and net return were higher on TOF than BOF. It was concluded that increase in energy consumption at farm level increased yield of rice, hence the farmers with higher cost of production could get better return of their crop. Keywords: economic analysis, energy consumption, Oryza sativa, production economics, Pakistan Citedy By: 19 Empirical models for the correlation of monthly average daily global solar radiation with hours of sunshine on a horizontal surface at Karachi, Pakistan [PDF] tubitak.gov.tr Author: F Ahmed, I Ulfat and also Journal: Turkish Journal of Physics,Vol.(),2004--Pages Abstract: A new set of constants for Angstrom-type correlation of first and second order, to estimate monthly average daily global solar radiation, has been obtained employing sunshine hours data recorded at Karachi, Pakistan (Lat. 24 540 N, Long. 67 080 E). Least square regression is performed to derive these constants. The correlation equations developed are employed to calculate the monthly average daily global solar radiation. These results are then compared with various other existing correlations and the measured data. Excellent agreement has been found between the estimated and the measured values. Keywords: global solar radiation, sunshine Citedy By: 71 Baloch nationalism and the geopolitics of energy resources: The changing context of separatism in Pakistan [PDF] dtic.mil Author: RG Wirsing 2012 Journal: books.google.com,Vol.(),--Pages Abstract: This monograph examines the Baloch separatist insurgency that has resurfaced in recent years in Pakistan's sprawling Balochistan province. The author maintains that the context of today's insurgency differs in certain important respects from that of its 1970s Keywords: energy resources, Baloch nationalism Citedy By: 35 Towards a new measurement of energy poverty: A cross-community analysis of rural Pakistan [PDF] maastrichtuniversity.nl Author: B Mirza, E Szirmai Journal: UNU-MERIT Working Papers,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: Most rural households in Pakistan remain in a state of energy poverty. They use a variety of non-conventional energy sources, including traditional biomass (firewood, animal and plant waste), kerosene and even LPG. A specially designed Energy Poverty Survey (EPS), carried out in rural Pakistan from December 2008 till January 2009, showed that rural households use different combinations of energy sources (the energy mix). This paper analyses the characteristics and consequences of the different energy mixes, used by richer and poorer rural households. Using data from the EPS, we develop a composite index to measure the degree of Energy Poverty among rural households. This index takes into account the inconvenience for the household associated with the use of different sources of energy, as well as its energy shortfall and takes household size into account. In our results, we found that 23.1% of rural households experience high degrees of energy inconveniences, spending ample amount of their time and effort in collecting or buying different energy sources. Next, using the standard conversion units to convert different energy sources into kilowatt hours, we found that 96.6% rural households experience severe energy shortfalls. Our new and inclusive measure of energy poverty which combines the energy inconveniences and the energy shortfalls, reveals that 91.7% of all rural households in Punjab province of Pakistan are in the state of severe energy poverty. Keywords: Energy access; energy poverty measurement; energy indicators; energy inconvenience index; energy poverty index Citedy By: 32 Prospects of renewables penetration in the energy mix of Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: SZ Farooqui Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews2014,Vol.(),29--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is the sixth most populous country of the world comprising 2.56% of the total global population. However, it ranks 37th in the energy consumption, at 0.37% of the world total. The per capita energy availability is only 43 W, which is 1/7th of the world average. The greatest reason for such a huge energy deficiency is its heavy dependence on imported oil for power generation. The country is however, rich in renewable energy sources and has vast potential for their exploitation. In this article, a survey of the availability of various renewable energy sources, including hydel, solar, wind and biomass, and their current and future penetration prospects in the total energy mix have been carried out, with some recommendations. It is estimated that Pakistan has the feasible potential of 30 GW of installed power capacity from hydel and 50 GW of installed capacity from wind by 2030. Keywords: Pakistans energy; Energy mix; Renewable energy; Wind energy; Solar energy; Biomass Citedy By: 29 Solar and wind energy potential and utilization in Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: IA Raja, RS Abro Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.5(),1994--Pages583-586 Abstract: Pakistan needs substantial amount of energy to develop its industry and to increase the agricultural productivity. The available indigenous energy resources are limited. The only option which the country has to pursue is renewable energy. This paper identifies the potentials of solar and wind energy. The prime sites for wind are coastal area, arid zone and hill terrains. Solar energy is abundant over most part of the country, maximum being received over Quetta valley. Keywords: Solar energy, Wind energy, Energy conservation, Renewable energy, Clean energy resources Citedy By: 21 Relationship between financial leverage and financial performance: Evidence from fuel & energy sector of Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: S Akhtar, B Javed, A Maryam, H Sadia Journal: European Journal of Business & Management,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: Fuel and energy sector serves as the backbone of the economy. The segment provides support, not only for the economic development of the country by showing positive trends towards the sectoral growth, but also serves as a steering wheel for the growth of manufacturing, trading and service sector. It provides significant inputs for production, trade and service. A general concept prevails that the financial leverage is helpful to enhance the financial performance of the companies. For measuring the impact of financial leverage on the financial health of the companies, it is essential to know whether a positive relationship exists between the financial leverage and financial performance or not? So, this study is intended to test the hypothesis and to measure a relationship between the financial leverage and the financial performance of the fuel and energy sector in Pakistan. The paper also examines the generalization that firms with higher profitability may choose high leverage by using various statistical tools. The findings of the study show a positive relationship between the financial leverage and the financial performance of the companies by accepting the alternate hypothesis H1 and Ho is rejected. The results of the study confirm that the firms having higher profitability may improve their financial performance by having high levels of financial leverage. The study provides evidence by evaluating different facts. It reveals that the players of the fuel and energy in Pakistan can improve at their financial performance by employing the financial leverage and can arrive at a sustainable future growth by making vital decisions about the choice of their optimal capital structure. Keywords: Financial leverage, Firms Performance, Key Indicators- Financial Ratios, Fuel and Energy Sector in Pakistan Citedy By: 29 The relationship between electricity consumption, electricity prices and GDP in Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: F Jamil, E Ahmad Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: This study analyzes the relationship among electricity consumption, its price and real GDP at the aggregate and sectoral level in Pakistan. Using annual data for the period 19602008, the study finds the presence of unidirectional causality from real economic activity to electricity consumption. In particular, growth in output in commercial, manufacturing and agricultural sectors tend to increase electricity consumption, while in residential sector, growth in private expenditures is the cause of rising electricity consumption. The study concludes that electricity production and management needs to be better integrated with overall economic planning exercises. This is essential to avoid electricity shortfalls and unplanned load shedding. Keywords: Cointegration, Electricity, VECM Citedy By: 131 Energy conservation policies, growth and trade performance: Evidence of feedback hypothesis in Pakistan [PDF] uni-muenchen.de Author: SA Raza, M Shahbaz, DK Nguyen Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.38(10),2010--Pages6016-6025 Abstract: This study analyzes the relationship among electricity consumption, its price and real GDP at the aggregate and sectoral level in Pakistan. Using annual data for the period 19602008, the study finds the presence of unidirectional causality from real economic activity to electricity consumption. In particular, growth in output in commercial, manufacturing and agricultural sectors tend to increase electricity consumption, while in residential sector, growth in private expenditures is the cause of rising electricity consumption. The study concludes that electricity production and management needs to be better integrated with overall economic planning exercises. This is essential to avoid electricity shortfalls and unplanned load shedding. Keywords: Cointegration; Electricity; VECM Citedy By: 34 The cost of unserved energy: evidence from selected industrial cities of Pakistan [PDF] core.ac.uk Author: R Siddiqui, HH Jalil, M Nasir, WS Malik Journal: The Pakistan Development Review,Vol.47(3),2008--Pages227-246 Abstract: This study is an attempt to explore the cost of unserved energy due to power outages in Pakistan that started in 2007. The study is based on a survey conducted for four major industrial cities of PunjabGujrat, Faisalabad, Gujranwala, and Sialkot. In addition to quantification of output losses, the effect on employment, cost of production, and delay in supply orders are also examined. The output loss is quantified using two-dimensional analyses, controlling for variations in the duration of outages and in the shift hours. The survey data reveal that employment has not suffered any significant drop due to alternative energy arrangements. These arrangements, nevertheless, have increased the production cost of the firms. Delays in the delivery of supply orders are also due to energy shortage. The study reports that the total industrial output loss varies between 12 percent and 37 percent, with Punjab as the major affected province. In the two dimensional analysis resulting in nine scenarios for each province, the ranges of losses in billion Rs are 132-400, 109-331, 17-54 and 11-34 for Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan respectively. The overall industrial sector loss in volume ranges between 269-819 billion rupees. In the overall analysis, food and beverages, textile, and chemical product industries are respectively the top three industries on the scale of losses. However, in terms of percentages, the pottery and ceramic industry is the industry that suffered the most. Keywords: unserved energy, two-dimensional analyses Citedy By: 28 The linkages between deforestation, energy and growth for environmental degradation in Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: K Ahmed, M Shahbaz, A Qasim, W Long Journal: Ecological Indicators,Vol.49(),2015--Pages95-103 Abstract: This study explores the validation of the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) hypothesis for Pakistan using time series data from 19802013 with deforestation as an indicator (dependent variable) for environmental degradation, and four independent variables (economic growth, energy consumption, trade openness, and population) were also examined. The Autoregressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) bounds testing approach to cointegration and the VECMGranger causality test were applied. The results confirmed the existence of cointegration among the variables both in long- and short-run paths. However, the diminishing negative impact of economic growth on deforestation in the long-run confirms the EKC hypothesis for deforestation in Pakistan. Moreover, economic growth and energy consumption Granger cause deforestation. A bidirectional causal effect is detected between economic growth and energy consumption, however, in the long-run, economic growth and trade openness Granger cause energy consumption. This study was designed with several significant tests to ensure the reliability of results for policy use and to contribute to future studies on the environment-growth-energy nexus. Keywords: Deforestation; Energy Consumption; Environmental Kuznets Curve; Cointegration; Pakistan Citedy By: 34 Pakistan: energy planning in a strategic vortex, Pages-155. [PDF] URL Author: CK Ebinger Journal: Indiana University Press,Vol.(),1981--Pages Abstract: Abstract missing Keywords: Keywords Citedy By: 21 Energy-poverty alleviation in Pakistan through use of indigenous energy resources11This paper is based on a presentation made at the 1st International Conference [PDF] URL Author: AW Bhutto, S Karim Journal: Energy for Sustainable Development,Vol.11(1),2007--Pages58-67 Abstract: The relation between access to energy and indicators of development is well established. It is directly related to most pressing social, economic, environmental, and security issues like poverty, jobs and income level, access to social services, population growth, industrial and agricultural production, food security, health, climate change and environmental quality which affect sustainable development. It is predicted that access to energy will become an acute problem in developing countries in the near future, mainly under the impact of population growth and the rising cost of fuels. This paper looks at how access to and use of energy are related to poverty. It also provides an overview of Pakistan's energy sector, discusses levels of energy services available to people in Pakistan, and potential future energy resources available at local level and their benefits. The study concludes by addressing the growing energy challenges; it has become inevitable for Pakistan to diversify its energy resources through developing indigenous energy resources, especially the renewables. Keywords: Energy-poverty, energy resources, Pakistan's energy sector, growing energy Citedy By: 20 Energy use and output growth in Canada: a multivariate cointegration analysis [PDF] URL Author: KH Ghali, MIT El-Sakka Journal: Energy Economics,Vol.26(2),2004--Pages225-238 Abstract: Using a neo-classical one-sector aggregate production technology where capital, labor and energy are treated as separate inputs, this paper develops a vector error-correction (VEC) model to test for the existence and direction of causality between output growth and energy use in Canada. Using the Johansen cointegration technique, the empirical findings indicate that the long-run movements of output, labor, capital and energy use in Canada are related by two cointegrating vectors. Then using a VEC specification, the short-run dynamics of the variables indicate that Granger-causality is running in both directions between output growth and energy use. Hence, an important policy implication of the analysis is that energy can be considered as a limiting factor to output growth in Canada. Keywords: Vector error-correction; Neutrality hypothesis; Energy Citedy By: 0 Determinants of rural household energy choices: an example from Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: I Jan, H Khan, S Hayat Journal: Polish Journal of Environmental Studies,Vol.21(3),2012--Pages635-641 Abstract: Multiple fuels-multiple choice is a common notion associated with the energy choice theory. Following the same theoretical framework, this study aims to identify: (i) existing sources of energy (ii) the associated factors that determine a household choice of a particular source of energy. The study is based on primary data collected from 100 randomly selected households in two villages in northwest Pakistan. The study found that rural households, though having access to multiple sources of energy, persistently depend on biomass fuels for domestic energy consumption. Nonetheless, rural households exhibit inter-fuel switching according to changes in their socioeconomic conditions. The study concludes that income is not the only determinant of transition from traditional to more convenient forms of energy, other factors such as access to alternative energy sources and consumer preferences also account for a household energy choice. Keywords: energy choice, energy-ladder, fuel-switching, fuel-stacking, Pakistan Citedy By: 24 Causality between energy and economic growth in Pakistan: An application of co-integration and error-correction modelling techniques [PDF] URL Author: S Alam, MS Butt Journal: Pacific and Asian Journal of Energy,Vol.22(2),2002--Pages 151-165 Abstract: This study investigates the causal relationship between energy consumption and economic growth in Pakistan, using a variety of econometric techniques and a sample of annual data covering the period 1960-98. The study found that the relevant macroeconomic aggregates are co-integrated by employing the Johensen and Jesulius technique. It detected a two-way casualty between energy consumption and economic growth in the long run. It also found that casualty ran from capital to energy consumption and from labour and capital to energy growth. Keywords: energy consumption, error-correction modelling techniques Citedy By: 21 Greener energy: Issues and challenges for Pakistanwind power prospective [PDF] researchgate.net Author: AW Bhutto, AA Bazmi, G Zahedi Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.20(),2013--Pages519-538 Abstract: Energy is one of the essential inputs for economic development and industrialization. A reliable supply of energy is essential to maintain and to improve human beings living conditions. The management of energy sources, rational utilization of energy, and renewable energy source usages are vital. Among the renewable energy sources wind energy is currently viewed as one of the most significant, fastest growing, and commercially attractive source to generate electrical energy because of the mature and cost effective energy conversation technology. Developing a utility-scale wind project is a complicated and time-consuming process which involves developers, landowners, utilities, the public and various local authorities. This article discusses the past, the present and the future of wind energy use in Pakistan. The efforts for the utilization of wind energy in the country are presented as well, along with barriers in its development. It is concluded that the potential exists, but significant efforts are needed to effectively make use of this cheap renewable energy source. Keywords: Green energy; Wind energy; Sustainable development; Pakistan Citedy By: 27 Hydropower use in Pakistan: past, present and future [PDF] URL Author: UK Mirza, N Ahmad, T Majeed, K Harijan Journal: Renewable and and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.12(6),2008--Pages1641-1651 Abstract: Energy is an essential ingredient of socio-economic development and economic growth. Electricity is a basic part of nature and it is one of the most widely used forms of energy. Hydropower is perceived as an environment-friendly, low-cost source of electricity that relies on proven technology. Pakistan has been an energy-deficient country historically. The installed electricity generation capacity is 19,547 MW presently out of which 6599 MW comes from hydropower. The identified hydropower potential in the country is approximately 41,722 MW. The Government is accordingly giving priority to hydropower generation projects in both public and private sectors. Recent power policies have attracted good response from private entrepreneurs. Several projects are in different stages of implementation. Micro-hydropower development in the northern part of the country is benefiting the previously under-privileged communities. This article presents an overview of hydropower development in Pakistan. Keywords: Keywords: Hydropower; Renewable energy; Pakistan Citedy By: 28 Renewable energy in Pakistan: policy strengths, challenges & the path forward [PDF] ethz.ch Author: M Yazdanie, PDT Rutherford Journal: ETH Zurich,Vol.(),2010--Pages Abstract: Today, only 55% of Pakistans population has access to electricity. The nation is currently facing a 3 GW power supply shortage - the most severe energy crisis to ever hit the country (Harijan, Uqaili and Memon 2008). The occurrence of prolonged and frequent power outages has had a negative impact on industry operation, the economy and the livelihood of citizens in general (Harijan, Uqaili and Memon 2008). While the energy shortage continues to grow, abundant indigenous sustainable energy resources such as wind, solar and biomass remain virtually untapped. The government attempted to promote the adoption of renewable energy technologies (RETs) in 2006 by implementing its first renewable energy policy. However, this policy has had limited success and faces a number of challenges. These policy challenges must be clearly identified and addressed in order to pave the way forward for a sustainable energy future in Pakistan. Currently, approximately 66% of power generation in Pakistan is derived from fossil fuels (primarily oil and gas) followed by hydroelectricity (30%) and nuclear energy (3%) (International Energy Agency 2007). Figure 1 below illustrates the shares of electricity generation by fuel type in 2007. The potential for renewable energy technologies to bridge the gap between energy supply and demand in Pakistan is significant. Renewable energy projects have the potential to improve energy security, provide socioeconomic benefits, reduce local pollution and mitigate climate change (Masud 2009). Further, due to the decentralized nature of renewable energy projects, they have the potential to provide electricity to remote and rural areas, thereby helping to alleviate poverty and reducing the need to collect and burn biomass fuel (Masud 2009). Solar, wind, biomass and hydro energy resources are widespread and abundant in Pakistan. Keywords: renewable energy technologies, power supply shortage Citedy By: 19 Pakistan: Energy Consumption and Economic Growth [with Comments] [PDF] URL Author: T Riaz, NH Stern Journal: The Pakistan Development Review,Vol.23(),1984--Pages431-456 Abstract: After the Arab oil embargo of 1973, oil prices rose rapidly and the energy-importing economies experienced an exogenously determined real supply shock, which, in most cases, led to a fall in their rates of economic growth and a corresponding rise in the rates of inflation. The energy system emerged as serious issue and the relationship between energy consumption and economic growth came into a sharp. The paper establishes Pakistans future energy demand which is consistent with the historical social and economic progress of the country and is un- constrained by the energy unavailability. Keywords: exogenously determined real supply shock, energy-importing, Pakistans future energy demand Citedy By: 23 Linking financial development, economic growth and energy consumption in Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: R Komal, F Abbas Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.44(),2015--Pages211220 Abstract: This paper aims at exploring the financegrowthenergy nexus for Pakistan over the 19722012 period. By employing the system GMM estimation technique, the study tries to capture the impact of financial development over energy consumption through economic growth channel and includes energy prices and urbanization in the structural model. The study finds positive and significant impact of economic growth and urbanization on energy consumption, while the effect of energy prices over energy consumption is significant but negative. Financial development positively and significantly affects energy consumption through the economic growth channel. Our analysis is important for policy makers for effective energy demand planning and conservation policies that would ensure sustainable economic development as well as serve as motivation to search alternative energy sources to meet the bourgeoning energy demand in Pakistan. Keywords: Energy consumption; Financial development; Economic growth GMM, Pakistan; Energy prices; Urbanization Citedy By: 27 Water and energy resources of the Himalayan block: Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and India [PDF] URL Author: CK Sharma - 1983 Journal: Sangeeta Sharma,Vol.(),1983--Pages Abstract: Abstract missing Keywords: keywords Citedy By: 18 Energy crisis and potential of solar energy in Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: HB Khalil, SJH Zaidi Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.31(),2014--Pages194201 Abstract: Energy is the basic need of modern life. Pakistan is an energy deficient country. Energy crisis is making bad impacts and destroying the economy. The current study investigates the relationship between the energy and demand supply in Pakistan. The purpose of this research is to evaluate the real reasons behind the current energy crisis. We want to find supplementary and alternate energy sources to cut down the load on the national energy mix. We select different areas and conduct our research and find the best possible renewable energy sources. In this paper we proposed the solution and best available indigenous resource in energy demanding areas. Keywords: Energy crisis; Renewable Energy; Solar Energy Citedy By: 23 Energy crisis in Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: N Haq, K Hussain Journal: Islamabad Policy Research Institute Factfile,Vol.(),2008--Pages Abstract: Abstract Keywords: keywords Citedy By: 14 Energy inputs and crop production in Western Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: MA Khan, G Singh Journal: Energy,Vol.21(1),1996--Pages45-53 Abstract: The objective of this study was to investigate the patterns of enery use and their relationship with crop production on farms in the Dera Ismail Khan (D.I. Khan) District of the North West Frontier Province, Pakistan. A year-long survey of daily inputs of energy to more than 600 crop plots of 26 farms in seven villages was carried out. These represented both rainfed and irrigated farms operated by bullocks and tractors. Irrigation was provided by either canal or tube-wells. Data on energy inputs were recorded for crop-production operations through biweekly visits to the selected farms, for human labor, bullocks, electric motors, diesel engines and tractors. Applications of fertilizers and chemicals and the results of yields were recorded. On a per hectare basis, the use of tractors reduces the use of both human labor and bullocks on farms and increases the total energy consumption. Due to timely land preparation, yields of most of the crops were higher on tractor-operated farms than on bullock-operated farms. On rainfed farms, energy consumption was the lowest due to lack of a permanent source of irrigation. Floods destroyed the crops on certain plots, and therefore subsequent operations like harvesting were not performed. Canal-irrigated farms had higher cropping intensities and used more energy than rainfed farms. Per hectare consumption of energy was highest on tubewell-irrigated farms due to the high consumption of electrical or diesel energy for pumping. Keywords: diesel energy for pumping, tubewell-irrigated farms , Energy inputs and crop production Citedy By: 21 Prospects of renewable energy for meeting growing electricity demand in Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: MA Uqaili, K Harijan, M Memon. Journal: AIP Conference Proceedings,Vol.53(),2007--Pages Abstract: Pakistan is an energy deficit country. About half of the country's population has access to electricity and per capita supply is only 520 kWh. Majority of the country's population resides in rural areas and most of them are yet without electricity. Conventional electricity generation includes 66.8% thermal, 30% hydel and 3.3% nuclear. It has been projected that electricity demand in Pakistan will increase in the range of 12 MTOE to 17 MTOE by the year 2018, at an average growth rate of about 5% to 7% and will require installed capacity of about 35 GW to 50 GW. Indigenous reserves of oil and gas are limited and the country heavily depends on imported oil. Thermal power generation on the other hand also pollutes the environment. This paper presents the availability of renewables such as hydel, solar, wind and biomass energy, and their prospects for meeting growing electricity demand in Pakistan and subsequent contribution in air pollution abatement. The study concludes that there is substantial potential of these renewables and they have also bright prospects for meeting growing electricity demand in Pakistan. Keywords: renewable energy, growing electricity demand Citedy By: 11 Financial development and energy consumption: empirical evidence from Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: ZK Kakar, BA Khilji, MJ Khan Journal: International Journal of Trade, Economics and Finance,Vol.2(6),2011--Pages Abstract: Even though a number of studies have attempted to determine the relationship between energy consumption and economic growth role of financial development has not been considered for efficient energy consumption. At present Pakistan is coping with a serious energy problem. This paper attempts to determine the nature of relationship between energy consumption, financial development and economic growth in Pakistan for the period 1980-2009 by employing co-integration and error correction techniques, finally Granger causality test is used to determine the direction of causality between financial development and energy consumption. The results indicate that financial development can be used as a useful measure to overcome energy problems by achieving efficiency in energy use Keywords: Energy consumption, economic growth, financial development, co-integration, error correction, granger causality. Citedy By: 22 Geology of Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: F Bender, HA Raza 1995 Journal: schweizerbart.de,Vol.(),--Pages Abstract: "Geology of Pakistan" presents the first-ever monographic synopsis of the geology of Pakistan available to date. Pakistan is a large country (79600 sq. kilometers in size) with a complex structure, which reflects its location at the boundary of the Eurasian, Indo-Pakistan and Arabian plates. Collision of these plates in the Quaternary gave rise to some of the highest mountains in the world (Himalayas, Hindukush etc. ). Ten chapters, authoritatively written by the ten contributors, synthesize the information available on the geology and the natural resources of Pakistan presently. The formation of sedimentary basins in response to tectonic activity, their evolution and stratigraphy are discussed, as are the rich but largely unexplored hydrocarbon deposits which formed in these basins. Complex processes formed a wealth of mineral- and ore deposits, which have prompted prospection, exploration but also systematic scientific study from the 19th century on. The authors expand on all aspects of Pakistans geology, among them: regional geology, tectonic units, basin formation, paleogeographic evolution, formation and occurrence of metamorphic and igneous rocks, water resources, hydrocarbon deposits and potential, mineral resources, and even more, including the pedological characteristics of her soils. "Geology of Pakistan" provides the reader with a wealth of current data on Pakistan in the text, supplemented by more than 140 figures and a comprehensive list of literature references. The book also includes four full color Landsat images and three large-size (60x80 cm) color maps of the structure of the Western Fold Belt, constructed from Landsat-MSS imagery. Keywords: Geology, rock, bituminous, Pakistan Citedy By: 78 Greenhouse effect reduction by recovering energy from waste landfills in Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: Author. MJS Zuberi, SF Ali Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.44(),2015--Pages117-131 Abstract: Landfills all around the world are one of the major sources that contribute towards global warming and climate change. Although landfilling should be prioritized last in the waste management hierarchy due to highest greenhouse gas emissions as compared to other waste management systems it is still very common around the world. In this study, methane emissions are estimated by applying First Order Decay model to landfills in Pakistan over the latest data available by Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency. Results demonstrate that nearly 14.18 Gg of methane is emitted from the landfills in Pakistan each year. By combusting this methane in the form of biogas collected from the landfills as a waste management scheme we can reduce greenhouse effect up to ~88%. Same percentage is observed when we apply the similar analysis over the potentially improved practice. Also, Pakistan is facing severe economic crises due to continuous increasing gap between energy demand and supply. Demand is increasing exponentially while supply is observed to remain constant over the last few years due to frozen capacity in spite of having significant renewable/alternate energy resources. Current electricity shortfall has reached up to 6000 MW. Present operational landfills in Pakistan can only contribute up to ~0.1% to cater the total deficit which does not make any significant difference but if 75% of the total waste generated today is collected and 50% of it landfilled then Pakistan has the potential to produce ~83.17 MW of power that can contribute up to 1.4% to overcome the current power shortage. The outcomes of this paper may also be applicable to other developing countries having similar resources. Keywords: Landfills, Renewable energy, Biogas, Greenhouse effect, Pakistan Citedy By: 22 Starved for energy, Pakistan braces for a water crisis [PDF] URL Author: S Masood Journal: NY Times,Vol.(),2015--Pages Abstract: Abstact Keywords: Key workds Citedy By: 0 Factors affecting commercial energy consumption in Pakistan: Progress in energy [PDF] academia.edu Author: K Zaman, MM Khan, M Ahmad Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy,Vol.19(),2013--Pages107-135 Abstract: The purpose of this study is to identify major macroeconomic factors that enhance energy consumptionfor Pakistan through the cointegration, error correction model and Granger causality tests over a32-year time period, i.e., between 1980 and 2011. The study employed the bivariate cointegrationtechnique to estimate the long-run relationship between the variables; an error correction model wasused to determine the short-run dynamics of the system, while Granger causality test was used to ndthe directions between these variables. The study investigates the relation between four energyconsumption variables (i.e., oil/petroleum consumption, gas consumption, electricity consumption andcoal consumption) and four macroeconomic factors which have further sub-classications, i.e., balanceof payment (BOP) factors (i.e., exports, imports, trade decit, workers remittances and current accountbalance), fuel factors (i.e., carbon dioxide emissions, natural resource depletion and net forestdepletion), agricultural crops yield per hectare (i.e., wheat, rice, sugarcane, maize and cotton) andindustrial production items (i.e., beverages, cigarettes, motor tyres, motor tubes, cycle tyres and cycletubes) in order to manage robust data analysis. The result conrms the long-run relationship betweentotal commercial energy consumption and macroeconomic factors in Pakistan, as oil/petroleumconsumption increases exports, fuel factors, agricultural crops yield per hectare and industrial items;however, the intensity of these factors are different in nature. Carbon dioxide emissions, net forestdepletion, beverages, motor tyres and motor tubes are more elastic with oil/petroleum consumption.However, oil/petroleum consumption decreases trade decit and workers remittances in Pakistan. Gas,electricity and coal consumption increases agricultural crops yield per hectare and industrial produc-tion which shows that as agriculture and industry modernizes, energy demand increases. Energizingthe food production chain is an essential feature of agricultural development which is a prime factor inhelping to achieve food security in Pakistan. The empirical results only moderately support theconventional view that energy consumption has signicant long-run casual effect on macroeconomic variables in Pakistan. The present study nds evident of unidirectional causality between thecommercial energy consumption factors and macroeconomic factors in Pakistan. However, there issome bidirectional causality exist which is running between electricity consumption (EC) and exports,EC to imports, EC to carbon emissions, EC to natural resource depletion (NRD) and EC to wheat. Theresults conclude that macroeconomic variables tend to positively respond to total primary energyconsumption. This indicates that increasing total commercial energy consumption may cause growthvariables which show that Pakistan is an input-driven economy Keywords: Commercial energy consumption, Oil consumption, Gas consumption, Electricity consumption, Coal consumption, Fuel factors,Pakistan Citedy By: 22 Assessment of present conventional and non-conventional energy scenario of Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: ZA Nayyar, NA Zaigham, A Qadeer Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.31(),2014--Pages543-553 Abstract: It has become the universal fact that the energy is one of the key factors for the smooth and faster upgradation of the socio-economic activities in any country. In Pakistan's history of over 60 years, the country presently is facing possibly the worst energy crisis that has geared back the socio-economic development below the level of critical sustainability and tolerance of the people. Every walk of life and industrial activities have declined due to long electricity shut-down every day since last few years. In view to access the current status of available energy resources, the present research study has been carried out to review and assess the demography of the country versus energy sectors, energy supplies & consumptions, status of fossil-fuel resources (oil, gas & coal), conventional & non-conventional electricity generation, and past, present & future energy demand-supply during 20012011. The results of this assessment indicate that conventional resources in Pakistan are and will not be enough to meet the ever growing energy demand and consequently highlight the importance of the renewable energy sources that are apparently encouraging in the country but have not been developed to any satisfaction. Priority is imperative to be given for the adequate development of renewable energy sectors in addition to the present energy mix. Keywords: Energy scenario, Primary energy supplies, Energy consumptions, Electricity demand vs supply, Renewable energy sources, Pakistan Citedy By: 17 Environmental Kuznets curve hypothesis in Pakistan: cointegration and Granger causality [PDF] researchgate.net Author: M Shahbaz, HH Lean, MS Shabbir Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.16(5),2012--Pages2947-2953 Abstract: The paper is an effort to fill the gap in the energy literature with a comprehensive country study of Pakistan. We investigate the relationship between CO2 emissions, energy consumption, economic growth and trade openness in Pakistan over the period of 19712009. Bounds test for cointegration and Granger causality approach are employed for the empirical analysis. The result suggests that there exists a long-run relationship among the variables and the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) hypothesis is supported. The significant existence of EKC shows the country's effort to condense CO2 emissions and indicates certain achievement of controlling environmental degradation in Pakistan. Furthermore, we find a one-way causal relationship running from economic growth to CO2 emissions. Energy consumption increases CO2 emissions both in the short and long runs. Trade openness reduces CO2 emissions in the long run but it is insignificant in the short run. In addition, the change of CO2 emissions from short run to the long span of time is corrected by about 10% yearly. Keywords: CO2 emissions, Energy consumption, Trade openness Citedy By: 162 The relationship between agricultural technology and energy demand in Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: K Zaman, MM Khan, M Ahmad, R Rustam Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.44(),2012--Pages268-279 Abstract: The purpose of this study was two fold: (i) to investigate the casual relationship between energy consumption and agricultural technology factors, and (ii) electricity consumption and technological factors in the agricultural sector of Pakistan. The study further evaluates four alternative but equally plausible hypotheses, each with different policy implications. These are: (i) Agricultural technology factors cause energy demand (the conventional view), (ii) energy demand causes technological factors, (iii) There is a bi-directional causality between the two variables and (iv) Both variables are causality independent. By applying techniques of Cointegration and Granger causality tests on energy demand (i.e., total primary energy consumption and electricity consumption) and agricultural technology factors (such as, tractors, fertilizers, cereals production, agriculture irrigated land, high technology exports, livestock; agriculture value added; industry value added and subsides) over a period of 19752010. The results infer that tractor and energy demand has bi-directional relationship; while irrigated agricultural land; share of agriculture and industry value added and subsides have supported the conventional view i.e., agricultural technology cause energy consumption in Pakistan. On the other hand, neither fertilizer consumption and high technology exports nor energy demand affect each others. Government should form a policy of incentive-based supports which might be a good policy for increasing the use of energy level in agriculture. Keywords: Energy demand, Agricultural technology, Pakistan Citedy By: 20 Greener energy: Issues and challenges for Pakistan-hydel power prospective [PDF] academia.edu Author: AW Bhutto, AA Bazmi, G Zahedi Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.16(5),2012--Pages2732-2746 Abstract: Water is a vital resource that supports all forms of life on earth. Progressive release of greenhouse gases (GHG) from increasing energy-intensive industries has eventually caused human civilization to suffer. During the past two decades, the risk and reality of environmental degradation have become more apparent. Renewable Energy provides an effective option for the provision of energy services from the technical point of view while hydropower, a major source of energy in the, appears an important renewable source of energy, its viability for large-scale energy production. Hydropower is renewable, reliable, clean, and largely carbon-free, and represents a flexible peak-load technology. With most of the world's hydropower potential available for near future development, it is local interests and sovereign states that decide how to manage their water resource base. In Pakistan the availability of power had been continually falling short of the demand of 24,474 MW and as a result, the country is experiencing power shortages of varying degrees in different parts of the country. Geographically, Pakistan has been blessed with river flows that are naturally supportive to electricity generation. Considering the large potential and the intrinsic characteristics of hydropower in promoting the country's energy security and flexibility in system operation, government is tried to accelerate hydropower development through number of policy initiatives. This paper investigates the progress and challenges for hydel power generation in Pakistan according to the overall concept of sustainable development and identifies the region wise potential of hydel power in Pakistan, its current status. Barriers are examined and Policy issue and institutional roles and responsibilities are discussed. Keywords: Green energy, Hydral energy, Mini-hydral, Sustainable development, Pakistan Citedy By: 22 A Stochastic Approach to Thermal Comfort--Occupant Behavior and Energy Use in Buildings. [PDF] URL Author: JF Nicol, MA Humphreys Journal: ASHRAE Transactions,Vol.110(2),2004--Pages554-568 Abstract: This paper presents the results of surveys of the use of simple controls--opening of windows, the closing of window blinds, and the use of lighting, heaters, and fans--by building occupants. Information is also presented on the use of air conditioning in mixed-mode buildings. The surveys were conducted in the UK, Pakistan, and throughout Europe. The data are analyzed to show how the use of each control varies with outdoor temperature. The paper discusses the application of such results to the simulation of occupied buildings. Keywords: Energy use in buildings, air conditioning, thermal comfort Citedy By: 163 Effect of updated WIMSD libraries on neutron energy spectrum at irradiation site of Pakistan Research Reactor-1 using 3D modeling [PDF] um.ac.ir Author: N Ahmad Journal: Annals of Nuclear Energy,Vol.32(5),2005--Pages521-548 Abstract: International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has recently released new WIMSD libraries based on current cross-section evaluations. Using these libraries the effect of different evaluated data sets on effective multiplication factor and neutron energy spectrum was studied with the help of 3D reactor simulation code CITATION. Simulation methodology adopted in this work was validated by analyzing IAEA 10 MW benchmark reactor. The keff values obtained using all newly released libraries are within 0.45% to the experimental value, while the old library released in 1981 resulted in calculated value 1.05% larger than experimental. The flux spectrum obtained for standard fuel element using 3D modeling is smaller in fast energy range and higher in thermal energy range than is calculated using the 1D model for the standard cell. In the flux trap, differences of about 4% to 13% were found in thermal flux using the newly released libraries as compared to that obtained using 1981 WIMSD library. The major differences in the flux spectra between newly available libraries and the 1981 WIMSD library in thermal energy range are due to the differences in cross-sections of hydrogen bound-in-water. The use of only newly available cross-sections of hydrogen bound-in-water with 1981 WIMSD library resulted in significant improvement in value of keff as well as in the flux spectrum. Moreover the differences among new libraries in the thermal energy range are also due to these cross-sections. Difference in fission spectra from different libraries is responsible for differences of flux spectra in the fast energy range. These differences in flux are reduced significantly in the fast energy range by only replacement of fission spectra. Keywords: Nuclear Energy, neutron energy spectrum , standard fuel element Citedy By: 20 Energy use for economic growth: cointegration and causality analysis from the agriculture sector Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: K Mushtaq, F Abbas, A Ghafoor Journal: The Pakistan Development Review,Vol.46(4),2008--Pages12--14 Abstract: Economic growth is energy-intensive. Nonetheless, in developing countries like Pakistan, the present energy use in agriculture is not strictly commensurate with energy consumption trends in developed countries. Sharp increases in energy prices have serious implications for the agrarian economy of Pakistan. This study implies the Johansen's co-integration approach and Granger causality to check the degree of integration and the direction of causality among different economic time series for the period 1972-2005. It is found that all the series are first-differenced stationary and there exists a long-run equilibrium relationship among concerned variables. The Granger causality test result suggests that unidirectional causality is running from GDP to oil consumption; electricity to GDP; while neutrality exists for gas and GDP. The implications of this study are that any future growth in the agriculture sector will increase the demand for oil, and if government improves the infrastructure and subsidises rural and agricultural electricity, it would significantly enhance agricultural share of GDP. Keywords: growth in the agriculture sector, agricultural electricity ,economic growth Citedy By: 21 Energy use in mountain areas: Trends and patterns in China, India, Nepal and Pakistan [PDF] agris.fao.org Author: K Rijal 1999 Journal: agris.fao.org,Vol.(),--Pages Abstract: This publication summarizes the main findings of a set of studies on energy use patterns in the HKH region carried out in four countries separately, namely, China, India, Nepal, and Pakistan. The results of the studies were used to prepare energy balance tables for the HKH Region of each country and to identify issues emerging concerning energy use. The issues identified were: prevailing unsustainable trends in energy supply and demand in the mountains; inharmonious energy transitions, on the one hand towards non-monetized, low quality energy form and on the other towards non-renewable fossil fuels; wrong choice of energy resources and technologies as a result of a perspective related to both quality and quantity of energy in programme design; ignorance of the bio-physical aspects of mountain areas; weak gender participation; lack of understanding of socio cultural issues; lack of a suitable institutional framework to promote decentralized renewable energy technologies; and the methodological dilemma of internalizing environmental concerns. The publication also proposes a four-pronged strategy for sustainable energy development in the mountains. First, programmes must be geared towards increasing wood resources on a large scale and to upgrading the quality of biomass fuels in order to meet cooking and heating needs. Second, energy policies for mountain areas should emphasize new and renewable decentralized resources and technologies (via rural electrification or motive power generation), not only in order to sustain and increase economic activities but also to reduce human drudgery, particularly that of women and children. Third, efficient energy technologies should be promoted to facilitate improvements in the physical quality of life and achieve a significant reduction in health hazards. Fourth, large-scale development of hydropower should be initiated, in order to generate revenue for alleviating the existing poverty of mountain communities and to develop social and physical infrastructures suitable for these communities. At the same time, care must be taken not only to internalize the associated environmental costs into these projects, but also to ensure that such development results in the overall development of mountain areas. Keywords: energy use patterns, mountain areas, energy policies, energy technologies Citedy By: 16 How warm is the corporate response to climate change? Evidence from Pakistan and the UK [PDF] URL Author: HK Jeswani, W Wehrmeyer Journal: Business Strategy and the Environment,Vol.17(1),2008--Pages4660 Abstract: In response to growing consensus among scientists and governments to act fast to avoid dangerous impacts of climate change, many industries have started to prepare for a carbon-constrained world. However, this response is far from being uniform. Often action is predicated on economic, technological, organizational and institutional drivers and barriers, which vary between countries and across industrial sectors. In order to understand the effectiveness of industry response, it is therefore important to analyse corporate response across different sectors in different countries. Focusing on the nine most energy-intensive and greenhouse gas (GHG) emitting industrial sectors, this paper compares corporate responses to climate change in Pakistan and the UK. By analysing the divergence of strategies adopted by industries across different sectors in two countries, the paper examines the key factors influencing corporate adoption and implementation of GHG reduction and energy-efficiency strategies in Pakistan and the UK. Keywords: energy-efficiency strategies, UK, Pakistn, climate change Citedy By: 167 Distribution of global insolation over Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: IA Raja, JW Twidell Journal: Solar Energy,Vol.44(2),1990--Pages63-71 Abstract: There are only five observatories measuring global insolation in Pakistan, which cannot represent the solar climate of the country. However 37 observatories, distributed fairly well over the entire country, record sunshine. Therefore insolation-sunshine empirical Keywords: Record sunshine, insolation-sunshine empirical, global insolation Citedy By: 43 Natural gas consumption and economic growth in Pakistan [PDF] URL Author: M Shahbaz, HH Lean, A Farooq Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.18(),2013--Pages87-9 Abstract: Natural gas is a dominant fuel in Pakistan. It offers the cheapest and a cleaner alternative source of energy. This paper examines the relationship of natural gas consumption and economic growth in Pakistan. We include capital, labor and exports in the model with multivariate framework. The ARDL bounds testing approach to cointegration and innovative accounting approach are employed to investigate the dynamic causality relationships among the variables. We find the existence of long-run relationship among the variables. Natural gas consumption, capital, labor and exports are positively affecting economic growth in Pakistan. Furthermore, we support the natural gas consumption-led-growth hypothesis and suggest that natural gas conservation policies may retard economic growth. Keywords: Natural gas consumption, Economic growth, Pakistan Citedy By: 72 An overview of energy status and development in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032115002828 Author: Omer Rauf, Shujie Wang, Peng Yuan & Junzhe Tan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.48(),2015--Pages892-931 Abstract: Energy is the basic necessity for life and a key factor to excel a countrys economy. Pakistan despite being richly blessed with natural energy resources is dependent on foreign sources and is currently facing severe energy deficiency. At the time of its independence in 1947, Pakistan inherited 60 MW of power. The energy sector had made some progress in the beginning but unfortunately, the growth in positive curve couldnt last long. The dilemma of the ever increasing gap between demand and supply has rendered Pakistan an energy deficient country where most the people have none or limited access to electricity. This paper gives an overview of the energy status of Pakistan. In this paper, I have discussed (a) major aspects of energy sector of Pakistanits establishment, history and accomplishments, (b) various institutions for energy generation and distribution, (c) total installed and generation capacity, (d) current energy reserves in the country such as coal, oil, natural gas, nuclear energy, as well as the renewable energy resources which include wind energy, biogas, Hydel energy, geothermal energy, solar energy, tidal and wave energy, (e) current energy crisis in the power sector, discussing the key issues leading to the origin, causes and consequences of the problem. The paper also presents; (f) possible solutions to overcome this crisis which is becoming hazardous for the countrys economy. The various government, semi-government and private organizations and their efforts to resolve the situation of energy deficit and (g) renewable energy can provide an alternative form of energy, why and how it can provide better replacement of other forms of energy, barriers that halt progress in this area and various renewable energy projects have also been illustrated. The goals, principles and impacts of the National Power Policy2013 is also mentioned in this paper. Keywords: Electrical power energy, Energy crisis, Electricity generation, Renewable energy resources, Current power sector in Pakistan Citedy By: 10 Measuring production efficiency of small firms in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305750X97001228 Author: Abid A.Burki, DekTerrell Journal: World Development,Vol.26(1),1998--Pages155-169 Abstract: This paper examines the efficiency of small manufacturing firms in Gujranwala, Pakistan. In the first step of the study, we construct measures of technical and scale efficiency for a sample of 153 small manufacturing firms from nine industries. The second step includes Tobit regressions of these measures on attributes of the firm and entrepreneur to examine sources of firm efficiency. Results reveal that newer firms, firms run by entrepreneurs with at least primary education, and firms engaging in production subcontracting appear more efficient and that many firms operate at less than the optimal scale. Keywords: efficiency, entrepreneur, data envelopment analysis Citedy By: 99 Energy crisis, greenhouse gas emissions and sectoral growth reforms: Repairing the fabricated mosaic [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652615011063 Author: Muhammad Imran Qureshi, Amran Md.Rasli & Khalid Zaman Journal: Journal of Cleaner Production,Vol.112(5),2016--Pages3657-3666 Abstract: The study examined energy crisis and sought solutions for reforms in the largest regions of the world i.e. East Asia & Pacific, Europe and Central Asia, Latin America & the Caribbean, South Asia, and Sub Saharan Africa. The study used number of growth related factors over the period of 19752012. The results indicate significant relationship between electric power shortage and growth related specific factors; however, the intensity for each factor varies from region to region. The results of Granger causality verify multiple cause-effect channels in the different regions i.e. feedback hypothesis, economic factors driven electric shortage; electric shortage driven economic factors and no causal relationship between the variables. The results of variance decomposition analysis indicate that greenhouse gas emissions exhibit the largest contribution due to shortages in the electric power transmission. The study opens the debate for environmentalists, government and non-government officials to formulate the sustainable policies related to energy reforms. Keywords: Energy shortage, Access to electricity, Greenhouse gas emissions, Agriculture value added, Industry value-added, World's regions Citedy By: 34 Neutronic analysis for core conversion (HEULEU) of Pakistan research reactor-2 (PARR-2) [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454908000303?via%3Dihub Author: Mahmood, Tayyab; Pervez, Showket; Iqbal, Masood Journal: Annals of Nuclear Energy,Vol.35(8),2008--Pages1440-1446 Abstract: Neutronic analyses for the core conversion of Pakistan research reactor-2 (PARR-2) from high enriched uranium (HEU) fuel to low enriched uranium (LEU) fuel has been performed. Neutronic model has been verified for 90.2% enriched HEU fuel (UAl4Al). For core conversion, UO2 fuel was chosen as an appropriate fuel option because of higher uranium density. Clad has been changed from aluminum to zircalloy-4. Uranium enrichment of 12.6% has been optimized based on the design basis criterion of excess reactivity 4 mk in miniature neutron source reactor (MNSR). Lattice calculations for cross-section generation have been performed utilizing WIMS while core modeling was carried out employing three dimensions option of CITATION. Calculated neutronic parameters were compared for HEU and LEU fuels. Comparison shows that to get same thermal neutron flux at inner irradiation sites, reactor power has to be increased from 30 to 33 kW for LEU fuel. Reactivity coefficients calculations show that doppler and void coefficient values of LEU fuel are higher while moderator coefficient of HEU fuel is higher. It is concluded that from neutronic point of view LEU fuel UO2 of 12.6% enrichment with zircalloy-4 clad is suitable to replace the existing HEU fuel provided that dimensions of fuel pin and total number of fuel pins are kept same as for HEU fuel. Keywords: Neutronic analysis, Research reactor-2, Pakistan, Conversion Citedy By: 19 The potential of solar powered transportation and the case for solar powered railway in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032114004778 Author: Syed Husain Imran Jaffery, Mushtaq Khan, Liaqat Ali, Hassan Abbas Khan, Riaz Ahmad Mufti,Ashfaq Khan, Nawar Khan,Syed M Jaffery Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.39(),2014--Pages270-276 Abstract: The growth of a country can be gaged directly from its growing demand for energy. If the demand for energy is not met in-time then it would severely hamper growth leading to economic meltdown and collapse. Pakistan is a developing economy with a vast potential for industrialization. However, the ever increasing energy deficit faced by the country has led to a severe economic slowdown. Apart from the industrial demand for electricity, transport sector is also a major consumer of energy in the country. This research, keeping in view the importance of transport sector as well as its energy requirements, proposes to utilize solar energy for the development of a solar powered railway transport system in the country. For this purpose, the solar energy potential of Pakistan has been evaluated and a case study for solar powered vehicles is presented, with an aim of utilizing renewable energy resources within the country. Keywords: Solar energ, yTransport, Renewable energy Citedy By: 15 The energy release in great earthquakes [PDF] http://gps-prod-storage.cloud.caltech.edu.s3.amazonaws.com/people_personal_assets/kanamori/HKjgr77.pdf Author: Hiroo Kanamori Journal: Journal of Geophysical Research, Solid Earth and Planets ,Vol.82(20),1977--Pages29812987 Abstract: The conventional magnitude scale M suffers saturation when the rupture dimension of the earthquake exceeds the wavelength of the seismic waves used for the magnitude determination (usually 550 km). This saturation leads to an inaccurate estimate of energy released in great earthquakes. To circumvent this problem the strain energy drop W (difference in strain energy before and after an earthquake) in great earthquakes is estimated from the seismic moment M0. If the stress drop is complete, W = W0 = (/2)M0 M0/(2104), where is the rigidity; if it is partial, W0 gives the minimum estimate of the strain energy drop. Furthermore, if Orowan's condition, i.e., that frictional stress equal final stress, is met, W0 represents the seismic wave energy. A new magnitude scale Mw is defined in terms of W0 through the standard energy-magnitude relation log W0 = 1.5Mw + 11.8. Mw is as large as 9.5 for the 1960 Chilean earthquake and connects smoothly to Ms (surface wave magnitude) for earthquakes with a rupture dimension of about 100 km or less. The Mw scale does not suffer saturation and is a more adequate magnitude scale for great earthquakes. The seismic energy release curve defined by W0 is entirely different from that previously estimated from Ms. During the 15-year period from 1950 to 1965 the annual average of W0 is more than 1 order of magnitude larger than that during the periods from 1920 to 1950 and from 1965 to 1976. The temporal variation of the amplitude of the Chandler wobble correlates very well with the variation of W0, with a slight indication of the former preceding the latter. In contrast, the number N of moderate to large earthquakes increased very sharply as the Chandler wobble amplitude increased but decreased very sharply during the period from 1945 to 1965, when W0 was largest. One possible explanation for these correlations is that the increase in the wobble amplitude triggers worldwide seismic activity and accelerates plate motion which eventually leads to great decoupling earthquakes. This decoupling causes the decline of moderate to large earthquake activity. Changes in the rotation rate of the earth may be an important element in this mechanism. Keywords: Energy release, Earthquakes, Seismic waves Citedy By: 1943 Status of biodiesel research and development in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032112002481 Author: Mohammed Harun Chakrabarti, Mehmood Ali, Jafar Nazir Usmani, Nasim Ahmed Khan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.16(7),2012--Pages4396-4405 Abstract: Performance of biodiesel in engines is well established and biodiesel is currently adjudged as a low carbon fuel with the most potential of replacing fossil fuels. The fossil fuel sources are dwindling in Pakistan resulting in the importation of about 8.1 million tonnes at approximately US$ 9.4 billion per annum. In the ambit of this justification, augmenting the energy scarce resources in Pakistan through the intense harnessing of the varied biodiesel sources can adequately address the deficiency and can ensure energy security. Towards this end, the progress attained in biodiesel related researchers in Pakistan are evaluated and presented with the view of highlighting ways of achieving the target set by the Government. A feedstock that drew less attention is spent triglycerides, and the little work reported by some organizations appeared promising. Now the onus is upon organizations such as the Alternative Energy Development Board and Pakistan State Oil to harness the research results from several indigenous Universities and develop a full-scale biodiesel economy in Pakistan. Keywords: BiodieselPakistanAlternative energy development boardJatrophaPongame Citedy By: 19 Residential energy demand: a case study of Pakistan [PDF] http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/pdfplus/10.1108/eb002572 Author: Mahmood Iqbal Journal: Journal of Economic Studies,Vol.11(1),1984--Pages40-48 Abstract: A model for household demand for energy in Pakistan is developed on the basis of stock of fuelconsuming appliances and their rate of utilisation. Income and price elasticities of fuels are estimated by the OLS and GLS methods. These elasticities are found statistically significant and consistent with a priori knowledge of economic theory. Several policy implications are pointed out and suggestions are made for improvement in future estimation. Keywords: Residential energy demand, Pakistan, household energy, OLS method, GLS methods Citedy By: 5 Residential energy demand: a case study of Pakistan [PDF] http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/pdfplus/10.1108/eb002572 Author: Mahmood Iqbal Journal: Journal of Economic Studies,Vol.11(1),1984--Pages40-48 Abstract: A model for household demand for energy in Pakistan is developed on the basis of stock of fuelconsuming appliances and their rate of utilisation. Income and price elasticities of fuels are estimated by the OLS and GLS methods. These elasticities are found statistically significant and consistent with a priori knowledge of economic theory. Several policy implications are pointed out and suggestions are made for improvement in future estimation. Keywords: Residential energy demand, Pakistan, household energy, OLS method, GLS methods Citedy By: 5 Characteristics of indoor/outdoor particulate pollution in urban and rural residential environment of Pakistan [PDF] http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2009.00624.x/full Author: Colbeck, Z. A. Nasir, Z. Ali Journal: Indoor Air,Vol.20(1),2010--Pages4051 Abstract: : Particulate pollution has emerged as a serious environmental health concern in Pakistan. The use of biomass fuels in traditional stoves produces high levels of indoor air pollutants. In Pakistan, 94% of rural and 58% of urban households depend on biomass fuel. This study investigates variations in indoor/outdoor concentrations of particulate matter during various activities for three different micro-environments in Pakistan. At a rural site, the average indoor/outdoor ratios for PM10, PM2.5, and PM1, in kitchens using biomass fuels were 3.80, 4.36, and 4.11, respectively. A large variation was recorded in the mass concentration of particulate matter during cooking with concentrations in the range 40008555 g/m3. In a living room at a rural site, the average indoor/outdoor ratios for PM10, PM2.5, and PM1 were 1.74, 2.49, and 3.01, respectively. At the urban site, the average indoor/outdoor ratios for the same size fractions were 1.71, 2.88, and 3.47, respectively. Cooking, cleaning and smoking were identified as principal contributors to the high indoor levels of particulate matter. This study showed considerably high concentrations of particulate matter, particularly in kitchens using biomass fuels, as compared to living areas. Thus women and children face the greatest exposure due to the amount of time they spend in the kitchen. Keywords: Indoor particulate pollution, outdoor particulate pollution, urban residential pollution, rural residential pollution, environmental health, Pakistan Citedy By: 55 Coal consumption and economic growth revisited: structural breaks, cointegration and causality tests for Pakistan [PDF] http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1260/0144-5987.30.3.499 Author: Saten Kumar, Muhammad Shahbaz Journal: Energy Exploration & Exploitation,Vol.30(3),2012--Pages 499522 Abstract: A global profusion of coal provides many countries with opportunities for economic growth. The direction of causality between coal consumption and economic growth is useful for policy making, however, existing empirical evidence have failed to reach a consensus. This paper examined the liaison between coal consumption and economic growth for Pakistan over the period 19712009. The endogenous two-break LM unit root test, derived in Lee and Strazicich (2003), is used to assess the order of integration of the variables and structural breaks in the data series. Application of the autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) bounds test reveals a cointegrating relationship between real income, real capital stock, labour and coal consumption, and further application of general to specific (GETS), Engle and Granger (EG), Stock Watson's dynamic ordinary least squares (DOLS) and Phillip Hansen's fully modified ordinary least squares (FMOLS) methods show statistical robustness of the estimates. The elasticity with respect to coal consumption is positive and significant. The vector error correction model (VECM) based Granger causality test and innovative accounting procedures (variance decomposition and impulse response functions) are also applied. Keywords: Coal consumption, economic growth, causality tests, Pakistan Citedy By: 14 Techno-economic comparison between B10 of Eruca sativa L. and other indigenous seed oils in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957582010001151 Author: MH Chakrabarti, M Ali, S Baroutian Journal: Process Safety and Environmental Protection,Vol.89(3),2011--Pages165-171 Abstract: Eruca sativa L. (known as taramira in South Asia) oil biodiesel shows good fuel properties when tested against ASTM D 6751 standard. Environmental performance of taramira oil B10 (10% (v/v) biodiesel blends with mineral diesel fuel, which is based upon the target set by the Government of Pakistan for 2025) in terms of engine exhaust emissions of CO2, CO, SO2, NOX and PM10 is compared with jatropha, castor and canola oil B10 fuels and found to be better. However, its calorific value is low thus resulting in poor engine performance in comparison to other B10 fuels. In addition, due to the high cost of taramira oil at present, it is not economical to produce in comparison to jatropha biodiesel. Study suggested that these drawbacks may be circumvented by growing taramira plants on large scale on marginal lands across South Asian countries and conducting further research to increase its calorific value. Keywords: B10,Taramira,High speed diesel (HSD) fuel,Castor,Jatropha Citedy By: 20 Distribution of wind power resource over Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/096014819290075E Author: SM Nasir, SM Raza, IA Raja Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.2(4-5),1992--Pages411-420 Abstract: The synthesis and presentation of the wind data are required to establish the wind resource climatology for an area. In this respect, wind contour maps are essential to visualize and quantify the variation of wind speed over the country. Using the average data from 59 locations, iso-wind speed contours are drawn by constructing monthly and yearly maps. The most suitable period for utilizing wind potential is MayAugust. During this period, the country as a whole exhibits the best wind resource potential, with an average speed of about 3 m/s. (3 m/s average wind speed is very poor for wind power generation.) The most promising regions for exploiting wind power throughout the year are the coastline, lower Sind and north-western Balochistan. Keywords: Wind power, Wind data, Pakistan Citedy By: 7 Modelling electricity demand using the STAR (Smooth Transition Auto-Regressive) model in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544214011906 Author: Saima Nawaz , Nasir Iqbal, Saba Anwar Journal: Energy,Vol.78(),2014--Pages535-542 Abstract: This study attempts to estimate Pakistan's electricity demand by applying STAR (Smooth Transition Auto-Regressive) model. The covered study period is 41 years from 1971 to 2012. The results show that the electricity demand follows a non-linear path if the real electricity price is used as a transition variable. We find that the average real price of electricity is below the optimal level. In addition, the electricity demand is primarily determined by the level of development. The forecast statistics reveal that for a presumed GDP (Gross Domestic Product) growth rate of 6 percent, the electricity demand would jump almost three folds in 2020 as compared to the demand in 2012. Owing to a weak relationship between electricity demand and its price, a strategy built on price escalation may not work towards curtailing demand. To meet the future electricity demand, the following measures are important: i) shifting energy mix from thermal to renewable ii) increasing power sector's efficacy iii) adopting an integrated institutional approach and iv) creating a culture of conservation and responsibility. Keywords: Electricity, STAR, Pakistan Citedy By: 10 Prospects of PakistanChina Energy and Economic Corridor [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032116000277 Author: Faheemullah Shaikh, Qiang Ji, Ying Fan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.59(),2016--Pages253-263 Abstract: Chinas seaborne foreign oil supply through the Strait of Malacca is facing challenges, because of territorial disputes, pirate attacks and geopolitics. The PakistanChina Energy and Economic Corridor (PCEEC) offers the option of constructing an oil pipeline to bypass the Strait of Malacca. This paper studied the prospects of the PCEEC in the context of the security of Chinas foreign oil supply chain. We assessed all the existing and proposed oil supply routes from the Middle East and Africa to Chinas border in terms of supply timeframes, costs, energy consumption and GHG emissions. We used weight-based model to estimate the CAPEX, OPEX and per barrel levelized cost of a proposed oil pipeline in the PCEEC. From economic, time, energy and environmental perspective, our assessment suggested that the construction of an oil pipeline in the PCEEC would be compatible with the existing routes and offer the shortest time for transporting oil to Chinas border. The PCEEC would offer numerous prospects for regional energy and economic connectivity for both countries and the region, including social, economic, commercial and geopolitical benefits. Keywords: Oil supply challenges, Energy security, PakistanChina Energy and Economic Corridor (PCEEC), Weight- based model, One Belt-One Road Citedy By: 14 Impact assessment of global and national biofuels developments on agriculture in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261912008501 Author: Tariq Ali, Jikun Huang, Jun Yang Journal: Applied Energy,Vol.104(),2013--Pages466-474 Abstract: This research uses GTAP model to assess the expected future effects of national and global biofuels policies on agriculture markets and food prices in Pakistan. Our results show that by 2020, global mandates on biofuels will significantly affect the prices, production and trade of major feedstock crops such as sugarcane, maize, soybean and rapeseed, especially in the USA, Brazil and EU. Global biofuels developments are projected to increase the prices of maize, rapeseed, soybean, and sugarcane in Pakistan. Pakistan will benefit from improved trade balance in agriculture under the global-only scenario. Under Pakistan plus three-producers biofuels scenario, the price and production of sugarcane in Pakistan will increase substantially. Under this scenario, the country will face considerable loss in agricultural trade. Consequently, food-security of net-buyers may be threatened. The income of feedstock farmers will increase. Higher crude oil prices will strongly influence commodity markets via increased production of biofuels and agricultural production costs. Keywords: Biofuels, Impact, Agriculture, costs,Pakistan Citedy By: 13 Energy consumption and economic growth relationship: Evidence from panel data for low and middle income countries [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421510002612 Author: Ilhan Ozturk, Alper Aslan, Huseyin Kalyoncu Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.38(8),2010--Pages4422-4428 Abstract: This paper uses the panel data of energy consumption (EC) and economic growth (GDP) for 51 countries from 1971 to 2005. These countries are divided into three groups: low income group, lower middle income group and upper middle income group countries. Firstly, a relationship between energy consumption and economic growth is investigated by employing Pedroni (1999) panel cointegration method. Secondly, panel causality test is applied to investigate the way of causality between the energy consumption and economic growth. Finally, we test whether there is a strong or weak relationship between these variables by using Pedroni (2001) method. The empirical results of this study are as follows: i) Energy consumption and GDP are cointegrated for all three income group countries. ii) The panel causality test results reveal that there is long-run Granger causality running from GDP to EC for low income countries and there is bidirectional causality between EC and GDP for middle income countries. iii) The estimated cointegration factor, , is not close to 1. In other words, no strong relation is found between energy consumption and economic growth for all income groups considered in this study. The findings of this study have important policy implications and it shows that this issue still deserves further attention in future research. Keywords: Energy consumption, Economic growth,Panel data Citedy By: 235 Solar mapping of Pakistan using visible images from geostationary satellites [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S096014819700092X Author: A.Q.Malik, A.Mufti, H.W.Hiser, N.T.Veziroglu Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.13(1),1998--Pages1-16 Abstract: Solar maps of Pakistan have been prepared using visible data from Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES). The attenuation of solar radiation in the atmosphere has been also incorporated in the computer model. The data for this project were collected from INSAT satellite, which corresponds to 11:00 h local standard time. Keywords: Geostationary staellits, solar mapping, Pakistan Citedy By: 11 Water sharing between India and Pakistan: a critical evaluation of the Indus Water Treaty [PDF] http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02508060902902193 Author: Mary Miner,Gauri Patankar, Shama Gamkhar & 4th David J. Eaton Journal: Water International,Vol.34(2),2009--Pages Abstract: For nearly 50 years a relatively stable Indus Water Treaty (IWT) moderated competition for the Indus water between Pakistan and India. Rising demand for water in each nation could unsettle this stable relationship, as foreshadowed by the involvement of a third party during 20052007 for the first time in the treaty's history. This paper discusses Pakistan and India's experience in the context of other international shared rivers. For the benefit of their people, Pakistan and India could coordinate unilateral development and resolve issues rather than defer them Keywords: international shared rivers, India, Pakistan, Indus Water Treat, water sharing, Citedy By: 24 Sustaining economic expansion in Pakistan in an era of energy shortfalls: growth options to 20351 [PDF] http://relooney.com/REL_Pubs/Rel-OPEC-07.pdf Author: Robert Looney Journal: OPEC Enrgy review,Vol.31(2),2007--Pages125157 Abstract: Pakistan's recent economic acceleration together with rapid rates of population growth is having a significant impact on the country's energy supply/demand balances. Energy supplies in turn affect the pace and pattern of the country's economic expansion. Drawing on the empirically-based complex links between energy and the economy, several alternative scenarios of growth and energy needs are developed in an attempt to answer several key questions. In particular, what are some of the key interrelationships between sources of energy demand and supply? What are the economic growth consequences of alternative energy availabilities and, in turn, how do these growth patterns affect the subsequent energy supply and demand patterns? What energy strategies are suggested by the interconnection between the country growth requirements and energy needs? Are these significantly modified under rising or falling energy prices? Based on this analysis, several guidelines are drawn for the country's future energy policy. Keywords: energy shortfalls, economic expansion, energy supply/demand balances , Pakistan Citedy By: 6 Government Investment and Follow-on Private Sector Investment in Pakistan, 1972-1995 [PDF] http://www.jed.or.kr/full-text/22-1/Looney.PDF Author: RE Looney Journal: JOURNAL OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT,Vol.(),1997--Pages Abstract: The possibility that government investment can stimulate private sector investment has long been suggested. Until recently, an appropriate model to test for the relationship in developing countries has been absent. In 1984, Blejer and Khan developed and estimated a model for 24 developing countries between 1971 and 1979. They found that higher rates of investment took place when the private sector took a large role in capital formation. This paper estimates a similar model for one developing country, Pakistan, for the period 1972 to 1995. Our results are broadly similar to those obtained by Blejer and Khan and we suggest ways for the Pakistan government to stimulate the private sector by selective types of public investment. Keywords: Government Investment, Private Sector Investment, Pakistan Citedy By: 24 Environmental Kuznets curve and financial development in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032115010989 Author: MuhammadJavid,FatimaSharif Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.54(),2016--Pages406-414 Abstract: In this study, we analyzed the effects of financial development, per capita real income, the square of per capita real income, per capita energy consumption and openness on per capita CO2 emissions for Pakistan during 19722013. The bound F-test for cointegration yielded evidence of a long-term relationship among these variables. The results confirm the existence of an environmental Kuznets curve in Pakistan for both the short and long term. This finding indicates that at the initial stage of development, the level of CO2 increases with income, and after some threshold level of income, this relationship may change from positive to negative as more efficient infrastructure and energy-efficient technology are implemented during the development process of the country. The findings of this study also reveal a significantly positive sign for the coefficient of financial development, suggesting that financial development has occurred at the expense of environmental quality. The results further indicate that the key contributing factors to carbon emissions in Pakistan are income, energy consumption and financial development. In addition, the openness variable has no significant influence on carbon emission in either the short or long term. Keywords: EKC, Energy, CO2, Kuznets curve, Pakistan Citedy By: 20 A new crop yield forecasting model based on satellite measurements applied across the Indus Basin, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167880902000348 Author: Wim G.M.Bastiaanssen, SamiaAli Journal: Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment,Vol.94(3),2003--Pages321-340 Abstract: Three existing models are coupled to assess crop development and forecast yield in the largest contiguous irrigation network in the world: the Indus Basin in Pakistan. Monteiths model is used for the calculation of absorbed photosynthetically active radiation (APAR), the Carnegie Institution Stanford model is used for determining the light use efficiency, and the surface energy balance algorithm for land (SEBAL) is used to describe the spatio-temporal variability in land wetness conditions. The new model requires a crop identification map and some standard meteorological measurements as inputs. The conversion of above ground dry biomass into crop yield has been calibrated through harvest indices and the values obtained are compared with the international literature. The computations were executed in a GIS environment using 20 satellite measurements of the advanced very high resolution radiometer (AVHRR) to cover an annual crop rotation cycle. The validation with district data revealed a root mean square error of 525, 616, 551 and 13,484 kg ha1 for wheat, rice, cotton and sugarcane yield, respectively. The model performs satisfactorily for wheat, rice and sugarcane, and poorly for cotton. It is expected that the accuracy of the model applied to 1.1 km pixels decreases with the increasing number of crops occurring within a given pixel. Although AVHRR is basically too coarse a resolution for field scale crop yield estimations, the results provides yield predictions to policy makers in Pakistan with a spatial detail that is better than the traditional district level data. The gaps between the average and the maximum yield are 1075 and 1246 kg ha1 for wheat and rice, respectively. Future work should rely on the integration of high and low resolution images to estimate field scale crop yields. Keywords: Crop yield forecast, Early warning, Photosynthesis, Light use efficiency, NOAAAVHRR Citedy By: 310 Development of natural gas as a vehicular fuel in Pakistan: issues and prospects [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1875510014000213 Author: Muhammad Imran Khan, TabassumYasmin Journal: Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering,Vol.17(),2014--Pages Abstract: In a step towards adopting environment friendly fuel and to save foreign exchange, Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) was introduced by the Government of Pakistan in the country in 1992. Due to available price differential between CNG and gasoline/diesel and investor friendly policy and regulatory framework, CNG sector has shown tremendous growth over the last ten year in the country. This growing demand of natural gas by CNG sector, results in gas shortages in the country. This paper describes the key steps in the development of CNG as transportation fuel in Pakistan. The present scenario of the CNG industry including the natural gas vehicles (NGVs) population growth and the expansion of CNG refilling stations are discussed. Various aspects of the CNG program in Pakistan, for example environmental benefits, economic benefits and problems associated with CNG industry of Pakistan are illustrated. Keywords: CNG, Emissions, Vehicle, Fuel, Pakistan, Natural gas Citedy By: 17 A review of the wind power developments in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032115014331#! Author: Samreen Siddique, Rashid Wazir Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.57(),2016--Pages351-361 Abstract: Pakistan is among the 10 countries that face the worst energy crisis of the world. As the country struggles with a number of financial, political and social issues, the transition from a conventional fuels based economy to a green economy is not an easy one. Pakistan has been blessed with immense potential of clean renewable sources of solar, wind and biomass but they have not been exploited yet. Renewable energy technology sector has not penetrated the energy mix and is currently an emerging market. This paper highlights the steps the country has taken in the past and the steps that are being taken at present to emerge out of the prevailing energy crisis when even the most urban areas suffer from power outages of 12 h per day. Until 2009, no single grid interconnected wind farm existed but now the situation has changed considerably and wind farms contributing to the national grid are a reality now. Three grid interconnected farms have been inaugurated and many others are in pipeline. The national policy regarding wind power systems has recently changed after unexpected setbacks to ongoing projects. This paper reviews the developments in the wind power sector of the country and lists some suggestions that can help improve the wind power penetration in the national energy mix. Keywords: Wind power, Renewable energy, Independent Power Producers (IPPs), Pakistan Citedy By: 11 Pathways to reduce the environmental footprints of water and energy inputs in food production [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306919208001000 Author: S.Khan, M.A.Khan, M.A.Hanjra , J.Mu Journal: Food Policy,Vol.34(2),2009--Pages141-149 Abstract: With climate change and population growth, the pathways for reducing the environmental footprint of food production are increasingly sought, but poorly understood. This paper sketches the environmental footprints of water and energy use in food production systems. The main objective is to present an empirical application, to help identify the main pathways to reducing the footprints. The agricultural system of rice, wheat, and barley production on selected farms in the southern Murray Darling Basin in Australia is used as a case study. Further insights are gained through a review of the data published in pre eminent journals. Together the analysis indicates that boosting water productivity and improving energy use efficiency in crop production operations are the two possible pathways to reducing the environmental footprints of water and energy inputs in food production. These generic conclusions have implications for water, food and environment policy. Keywords: Food security, Water productivity, Irrigation, Energy efficiency, Energy ratio Citedy By: 126 Evaluation of arsenic and other physico-chemical parameters of surface and ground water of Jamshoro, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304389408017627 Author: Jameel Ahmed Baig, Tasneem Gul Kazi, Muhammad Balal Arain, Hassan Imran Afridi Journal: Journal of Hazardous Materials,Vol.166(2-3),2009--Pages662-669 Abstract: Arsenic contamination in water has caused severe health problems around the world. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the geological and anthropogenic aspects of As pollution in surface and groundwater resources of Jamshoro Sindh, Pakistan. Hydride generator atomic absorption spectrophotometry (HG-AAS) is employed for the determination of arsenic in water samples, with detection limit of 0.02 g l1. Arsenic concentrations in surface and underground water range from 3.0 to 50.0, and 13 to 106 g l1, respectively. In most of the water samples As levels exceeded the WHO provisional guideline values 10 g l1. The high level of As in under study area may be due to widespread water logging from Indus river irrigation system which causes high saturation of salts in this semi-arid region and lead to enrichment of As in shallow groundwater. Among the physico-chemical parameters, electrical conductivity, Na+, K+, and SO42 were found to be higher in surface and ground water, while elevated levels of Ca2+ and Cl were detected only in ground water than WHO permissible limit. The high level of iron was observed in ground water, which is a possible source of As enrichment in the study area. The multivariate technique (cluster analysis) was used for the elucidation of high, medium and low As contaminated areas. It may be concluded that As originate from coal combustion at brick factories and power generation plants, and it was mobilized promotionally by the alkaline nature of the understudy groundwater samples. Keywords: Arsenic, Cluster analysis, Ground water, Physico-chemical parameters, Surface water, Jamshoro, Pakistan Citedy By: 93 Evaluation of arsenic and other physico-chemical parameters of surface and ground water of Jamshoro, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304389408017627 Author: Jameel Ahmed Baig, Tasneem Gul Kazi, Muhammad Balal Arain, Hassan Imran Afridi Journal: Journal of Hazardous Materials,Vol.166(2-3),2009--Pages662-669 Abstract: Arsenic contamination in water has caused severe health problems around the world. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the geological and anthropogenic aspects of As pollution in surface and groundwater resources of Jamshoro Sindh, Pakistan. Hydride generator atomic absorption spectrophotometry (HG-AAS) is employed for the determination of arsenic in water samples, with detection limit of 0.02 g l1. Arsenic concentrations in surface and underground water range from 3.0 to 50.0, and 13 to 106 g l1, respectively. In most of the water samples As levels exceeded the WHO provisional guideline values 10 g l1. The high level of As in under study area may be due to widespread water logging from Indus river irrigation system which causes high saturation of salts in this semi-arid region and lead to enrichment of As in shallow groundwater. Among the physico-chemical parameters, electrical conductivity, Na+, K+, and SO42 were found to be higher in surface and ground water, while elevated levels of Ca2+ and Cl were detected only in ground water than WHO permissible limit. The high level of iron was observed in ground water, which is a possible source of As enrichment in the study area. The multivariate technique (cluster analysis) was used for the elucidation of high, medium and low As contaminated areas. It may be concluded that As originate from coal combustion at brick factories and power generation plants, and it was mobilized promotionally by the alkaline nature of the understudy groundwater samples. Keywords: Arsenic, Cluster analysis, Ground water, Physico-chemical parameters, Surface water, Jamshoro, Pakistan Citedy By: 93 RETRACTED: The relationship between agricultural technologies and carbon emissions in Pakistan: Peril and promise [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264999312001459#! Author: Khalid Zaman, Muhammad Mushtaq Khan, Mehboob Ahmad , Bashir Ahmad Khilji Journal: Economic Modelling,Vol.29(5),2012--Pages1632-1639 Abstract: This article has been retracted at the request of the Editor and the Publisher. After a thorough investigation, the Publisher has concluded that the Editor was misled into accepting this article based upon the positive advice of at least one faked reviewer report. The report was submitted from a fictitious email account which was provided to the Editor by the corresponding author during the submission of the article. The corresponding author, Dr Zaman, wishes to admit sole responsibility and to state that his co-authors were not aware of his actions. This manipulation of the peer-review process represents a clear violation of the fundamentals of peer review, our publishing policies, and publishing ethics standards. Apologies are offered to the reviewers whose identities were assumed and to the readers of the journal that this deception was not detected during the submission process. Keywords: fictitious email account , peer review Citedy By: 15 Estimation of radiation doses associated with natural radioactivity in sand samples of the north western areas of Pakistan using Monte Carlo simulation [PDF] https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-005-0835-1 Author: Khalid Khan, P. Akhter, S. D. Orfi Journal: Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry,Vol.265(3),2005--Pages371375 Abstract: Activity concentrations of naturally occurring radionuclides, i.e., 226Ra, 232Th and 40K, were measured in sand samples of north western areas of Pakistan using gamma-spectrometry. The measured ranges of activity concentrations for 226Ra, 232 Th and 40K were 36.9-51.9, 52.5-67.6 and 680-784 Bq . kg-1, respectively. Associated external dose was calculated using Monte Carlo simulation technique. A theoretical model to determine the gamma dose rate at 1 m height from the sand was employed for calculation the mass attenuation coefficient and self absorption in sand slab for the gamma-energies of these radionuclides and their progeny. The weighted average values of the measured gamma dose rates were 3.3, 4.5 and 12.4 nGyh-1 for 226Ra, 232 Th and 40K, respectively, with effective dose of 0.0220.004 mSv . y-1. Monte Carlo simulation shows that the sand slabs having more than 15 cm effective thickness contribute very little to the external gamma dose rate. The values of the external dose rate and annual effective dose were found to be much lower than the world average as well as from other countries of the world. Keywords: radiation doses, natural radioactivity, sand samples, Pakistan, Monte Carlo simulation Citedy By: 16 Oil prices and economic activity in Pakistan [PDF] http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/139156141001100204 Author: Afia Malik Journal: South Asia Economic Journal,Vol.11(2),2010--Pages Abstract: Oil price shocks have raised serious concerns among the policy makers around the world because of its adverse impacts for the net oil-importing economies. This article, based on the data from 197980 Q1 to 200708 Q2, analyzes the impact of rising oil prices along with the changing macro conditions on output. Oil prices and output are found to be strongly related, and to a great extent this relationship is non-linear. In addition, lower debt-GDP ratio, lower deficit spending, lower real effective exchange rate, and the existence of foreign exchange reserves and capital investment would cause output to rise. In Pakistan, besides making adjustments at the macro level, what is required is to make rational choices about the development of energy mix for the future to reduce the risk of oil price fluctuations in the global energy market. Keywords: Oil prices, economic activity, Pakistan Citedy By: 17 Energy crisis in Pakistan, adaptation and mitigation measures [PDF] http://www.academia.edu/7259158/Energy_Crisis_in_Pakistan_Adaptation_and_Mitigation_Measures Author: Abdul Ghafoor Bhatti, Abdul Rauf Bhatti, Ijaz Ahmad Chaudhary Journal: Journal of Faculty of Engineering & Technology,Vol.19(1),2012--Pages Abstract: Energy is part and parcel of every aspect of life as well as backbone of a countrys economy. Pakistan is lagging behind in this area despite of rich reserves of raw energy, but there is dire need for the investment and proper use of these reserves for driving the wheel of economy. Present energy scenario of the country, its available resources and their potential towards the solution are addressed in this paper. Statistical data in this work provides ease to policy makers in deciding major investment area to take the country towards prosperous future. A lot of partial projects like Independent Power Producers (IPPs) and Rental Power Plants (RPPs) have been made and invested but all in vain rather burden on economy. The sequence of investment field is also proposed which will pay back more in the long run. Keywords: Energy crisis, Pakistan, adaptation measures , mitigation measures Citedy By: 4 Indoor carbon monoxide and PM2. 5 concentrations by cooking fuels in Pakistan [PDF] http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2008.00563.x/full Author: A. R. Siddiqui, K. Lee, D. Bennett, X. Yang, K. H. Brown Journal: Wiley Online Library,Vol.(),--Pages Abstract: Biomass, such as wood, crop residues and dung are used as cooking fuels by half of the worlds population; three-fourth of such use occurs in developing countries (Bruce et al., 2000). Biomass provides 70% of Pakistans domestic sector energy and 53% of the biomass energy is from wood (IUCN, 2003; Rehfuess et al., 2006). Typical traditional biomass stoves can divert up to 38% of fuel carbon into products of incomplete combustion, including carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, along with releasing other toxic substances, including nitric oxides, sulfur dioxide, and formaldehyde (Bruce et al., 2000; Smith et al., 2000;Zhang and Smith, 2005).Indoor air pollution from biomass fuel is the 8th most important risk factor, responsible for 2.7% of the global burden of disease (Smith et al., 2004). In high-mortality developing countries, indoor smoke is responsible for an estimated 3.7% of the overall disease burden, making it the most lethal killer after malnutrition, unsafe sex and lack of safe water, and sanitation (Smith et al., 2004). The overall disease burden (Disability-Adjusted Life Years or DALYs) from indoor air pollution in developing countries is more than five times greater than the burden from outdoor air pollution (Smith et al., 2004). Women and young children in developing countries are particularly at risk of being exposed to high concentration of indoor air pollutants, because they spend the most time in the home during fuel burning. Well-established health outcomes related to indoor biomass burning include acute lower respiratory infections in children up to 5 years and chronic obstructive lung disease in adults (Bruce et al., 2000). Evidence is emerging that exposure to biomass burning increases the risk of other conditions, such as tuberculosis, asthma, cataracts, low birth weight, and peri-natal mortality (Bruce et al., 2000).Increased indoor air pollution can occur because of poor air mixing in the stove, especially when the stove is not well-ventilated, with concentrations of CO and PM often exceeding the ambient air quality standards set by the US. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and World Health Organization (WHO) standards for CO and EPA standard for PM <2.5 m aerodynamic diameter (PM2.5; von Schirnding et al., 2002). Various studies for wood burning have found high indoor levels of CO and PM2.5 in Guatemala (Bruce et al., 2000; Naeher et al., 2001), CO in rural Pakistan (Khushk et al., 2005), PM2.5 in rural Mexico (Brauer et al., 1996), PM <10 m aerodynamic diameter (PM10) in rural Bolivia (Albalak et al., 1999), suspended particle matter in India (Lohdi and Zain-al-Abdin, 1999), and respirable particulate (50% cut-off at 4 m) levels in India (Balakrishnan et al., 2004).The present study was a part of a larger study that evaluated prenatal exposure to cooking with wood fuel and adverse infant birth outcomes in a cohort of women living in southern semi-rural areas of Pakistan (Siddiqui et al., 2008). The purpose of this study was to measure and compare daytime indoor air concentrations of CO and PM2.5 in kitchens where wood or natural gas (NG) was used as cooking fuel. Additionally, the associations of housing characteristics and cooking patterns with indoor CO and PM2.5 concentrations were determined. Keywords: Indoor carbon monoxide, indoor air pollution, cooking fuels, Pakistan, indoor biomass burning Citedy By: 79 Environmental Kuznets curve in Romania and the role of energy consumption [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032112005540 Author: Muhammad Shahbaz, Mihai Mutascu, Parvez Azim Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.18(),2013--Pages165-173 Abstract: The aim of present study is to probe the dynamic relationship between economic growth, energy consumption and CO2emissions for period of 19802010 in case of Romania. In doing so, ARDL bounds testing approach is applied to investigate the long run cointegration between these variables. Our results confirm long run relationship between economic growth, energy consumption and energy pollutants. The empirical evidence reveals that Environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) is found both in long-and-short runs in Romania. Further, energy consumption is major contributor to energy pollutants. Democratic regime shows her significant contribution to decline CO2 emissions through effective implementation of economic policies and financial development improves environment i.e., reduces CO2 emissions by redirecting the resources to environment friendly projects. Keywords: Economic growth, Energy consumption, Environment Citedy By: 118 Tolerated noise levels in the U.K. and Pakistan and simultaneous thermal comfort [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0960148194901260 Author: M.Wilson, J.F.Nicol Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.5(5-8),1994--Pages1006-1008 Abstract: External noise is often given as a reason for air-conditioning buildings. This paper describes some pilot studies that examined climatic variation in noise tolerance and the interaction with the thermal environment. Through further studies it is hoped to establish criteria to judge the acceptability of naturally ventilated buildings in noisy areas. Keywords: Noise level, noise tolerance, thermal comfort, adaptation, United Kingdom, Pakistan Citedy By: 7 Independent power (or pollution) producers? Electricity reforms and IPPs in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S036054421500170X Author: Hassan Qudrat-Ullah Journal: Energy,Vol.83(),2015--Pages240-251 Abstract: This paper examines Pakistan's experience with electricity reforms pertaining to the various energy policies enacted in Pakistan over the past two decades. The effects of privatization in general and IPPs' investments in Pakistan's electricity sector in particular are analyzed. For long-term integrated assessment of electricity reforms and IPPs' investments, the development, validation, and application of a unique dynamic model is demonstrated. Contrary to the generally perceived positive effects of privatization and IPPs' investment, Pakistan's electricity sector is enduring severe gaps between demand and supply, higher electricity rates, and increasing CO2, SO2, and NO (nitrogen oxide) emissions. IPPs, due to their major investments in pro-oil generation, are the major electricity-related pollution producers. Through an immediate government intervention, a pro indigenous resource-focused alternate energy policy appears to provide cheaper and cleaner electricity in Pakistan. Keywords: Electricity, IPPs, Pakistan, Privatization, Environmental emissions, Energy policy Citedy By: 8 Turn on the lights: Macroeconomic factors affecting renewable energy in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032114004249 Author: Ihtisham Abdul Malik, AliasBin Abdullah, Arif Alam, Khalid Zaman Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.38(),2014--Pages277-284 Abstract: The objective of the study is to examine the relationship between macroeconomic factors (i.e., population growth; urbanization, industrialization, exchange rate, price level, food production index and live stock production index) and renewable energy in Pakistan over a period of 19752012. In addition, this study uses oil rent as an intervening variable to overcome the biasness of the single equation model. The results indicate that macroeconomic factors positively contributed to renewable energy consumption in Pakistan. The causality test indicate that there is a unidirectional causality running towards macroeconomic factors to renewable energy in Pakistan, however, renewable energy Granger cause oil rent but not via other route. In addition, there is bidirectional causality between exchange rate and live stock production in Pakistan. Variance decomposition analysis shows that economic growth has a major contribution to increase renewable energy in Pakistan. Keywords: Renewable energy, Oil rent, Exchange rate, Consumer price index, Pakistan Citedy By: 7 Iran-Pakistan-India Pipeline: Is It a Peace Pipeline? [PDF] https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/39802/Iran%20Pakistan%20India%20Pipeline.pdf Author: Abbas Maleki Journal: MIT Center for International Studies Audit of the Conventional Wisdom,Vol.7(16),2007--Pages Abstract: A major natural gas pipeline that would stretch from the fields of southern Iran to Pakistan and India itself a remarkable prospect is being planned. But it faces serious hurdles, not least the fierce opposition of the U.S. government. The history of relations between Persia and the Indian subcontinent is more than 2000 years old. Until 200 years ago, Persian was the language of literature and government in India. After separation of Pakistan from India, Iran faced a dilemma of its relations with these two new states. During the Shah's era, Iran preferred to have close relations with Pakistan, although economic ties with India were not ignored. After the collapse of the Soviet Union and Pakistan's support of hardliners in Afghanistan, Iran found India as a new partner in Asia. India has been slowly but surely forging a comprehensive relationship with Iran on energy and commerce, infrastructure development, and military ties. Iran looks to India as a developed, democratic, and politically lucrative country for cooperation. For instance, some 8,000 Iranian students are studying in India, compared with 2,000 in the United States.A big market for India, Iran has the world's second largest oil and gas proven reserves, and acts as an important access route for India to Central Asia and Afghanistan. Case in point: India is seeking new routes to reach to Central Asia. One of them is the North-South Corridor, which links India to Russia and all of the former Soviet Union via the Persian Gulf, Iran and Caspian Sea. Iran's considerations are boosting trade, having secure borders, and avoiding "encirclement" by American proxies. At the same time, Iran is opposed to the hegemonic presence of the United States and its troops in the Indian Ocean. India has not been hesitant to play the Iran card to draw concessions from the United States on other matters of bilateral concern. So the pipeline is freighted with more significance than merely the delivery of natural gas. Keywords: Iran-Pakistan-India Pipeline Citedy By: 10 An example of energy savings in LDCS: Improving electrical equipment in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0360544292900463 Author: Peter M.Miller, Howard S.Geller, Anibal T.de Almeida Journal: Energy,Vol.17(10),1992--Pages969-982 Abstract: The potentials for electricity conservation in Pakistan are around 20 and 40% in the industrial and commercial sectors, respectively. Programs and policies to promote electricity conservation are proposed, which include the establishment of efficiency standards, changes in import duties, training, education, and cooperative research. Keywords: Electricity Conservation, Efficiency Standards, Cooperative Research Citedy By: 4 Mitigation of power sector environmental emissions through energy efficiency improvements: the case of Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301479798902316 Author: R.M.Shrestha, A.I.Jalal, M.Latif, W.K.Biswas Journal: Journal of Environmental Management,Vol.54(3),1998--Pages249-258 Abstract: This paper assesses the potential of selected efficient electrical appliances for avoiding power generation and for mitigation of selected air pollutants from the power sector in Pakistan from technical as well as national, utility and user perspectives. The study shows that about 14, 21 and 35% of the total CO2, SO2and NOxemissions in the business as usual (BAU) case could be avoided by the adoption of selected efficient appliances during 19972015 from the national perspective, while the corresponding figures from the user perspective are 12, 17 and 29%, respectively. All selected efficient appliances would be cost effective to the users if electricity prices were set at the long-run marginal cost of supply.1998 Academic Press Keywords: efficient electrical appliances, electricity generation avoided, Carbon di-oxide mitigation Citedy By: 4 Coal gasification for sustainable development of the energy sector in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082608605001 Author: Abdul Waheed Bhutto, Sadia Karim Journal: Energy for Sustainable Development,Vol.9(4),2005--Pages60-67 Abstract: Pakistan has 19.5 gigawatts (GW) of electric generating capacity. The total power generating capacity has increased rapidly in recent years, due largely to foreign investment, leading to a partial alleviation of the power shortages Pakistan often faces in peak seasons. Rotating blackouts are, however, still necessary in some areas. The rules of the game for generating electricity are changing rapidly. The country's remaining recoverable reserves of crude oil are estimated at 42.28 million tonnes (Mt) (310 million barrels; 1 barrel = 0.1364 t). Thus, there is no prospect for Pakistan to reach self-sufficiency in oil. Pakistan has 853.19 billion cubic metres (Gm3) of proven gas reserves, and currently produces around 104.23 million m3 (Mm3) per day. While the energy demand is surging in Pakistan, at the same time pressure is building worldwide to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Pakistan is looking forward to finding ways to overcome the disadvantages of coal resulting from its relatively higher moisture, sulfur and ash content, in order to use this readily-available, indigenous resource to generate clean, reasonably-priced electricity. One way to overcome this problem is to convert coal from a solid to a clean gaseous fuel, which can then be burned like natural gas. When linked with modern combined-cycle turbines, gasification is one of the most efficient and environmentally sound ways of producing electricity from coal. Coal IGCC (integrated gasifier combined-cycle) power plants offer numerous benefits for the environment, power producers and consumers. This technology can help diversify the fuel supply and help balance Pakistan's future dependence on foreign sources of energy. Keywords: Coal gasification, sustainable development, energy sector, Pakistan Citedy By: 4 Radiometric analysis of Hazara phosphate rock and fertilizers in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0265931X97000180 Author: K.Khan, H.M.Khan, M.Tufail, A.J.A.H.Khatibeh Journal: Journal of Environmental ,Vol.38(1),1998--Pages77-84 Abstract: Natural radioactivity due to 40K, 226Ra and 232Th has been measured in phosphate rock samples, collected from various localities of Hazara division of Pakistan, and in locally prepared and imported fertilizer. For data acquisition and analysis, a high-purity germanium (HPGe) detector and a PC-based MCA were used. The 226Ra content was very high and was found to vary from 307.7 Bq kg1 to 617.5 Bq kg1. This can result in a significant radiation exposure if the rock and fertilizer are handled in places with poor ventilation that could lead to radon accumulation. These data can be used to determine the radioactivity being spread along with fertilizer on agricultural lands Keywords: Radiometric analysi, Hazara Phosphate, fertilizers, Pakistan Citedy By: 95 Factors influencing farmers adoption of energy-based water pumps and impacts on crop productivity and household income in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032115013957 Author: Boqiang Lin's, Izhar Ahmad Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.56(),2016--Pages1182-1193 Abstract: Transport sector, because of the growing industrialization and urbanization of Pakistan, is one of fastest growing sector in terms of output, energy consumption and CO2 emission. Its current performance and future outlook has the potential to leave behind problems related to the global issues of energy security and environmental sustainability. The extents to which energy and non-energy inputs are substitutable are the core issue in planning and designing of energy policies. For this purpose we establish a trans-log production function for Pakistan transport sector and the input factors capital, labor and energy are included. Output elasticities of each factor and the substitution elasticities between these factors have been estimated and analyzed for the sample period of 19802013. The results show higher output elasticity and that all pairs of factor inputs are substitutes because of the higher level of substitution elasticities. The results suggest that by allocating more capital in the transport sector, the relevant energy saving technology could be promoted, thereby realizing the substitution between capital and energy and reduction of CO2 emission as a result. It further suggest that by continuous upgrading of the capital, substitution between energy and labor can also be achieved and the transition of Pakistan transport sector from labor intensive to capital intensive can be realized. Keywords: Transport industry, Trans-log production function, Elasticity of substitution, Pakistan Citedy By: 7 SMEs' export problems in Pakistan [PDF] http://e3journals.org/cms/articles/1330778191_Jamshed%20%20et%20al.pdf Author: Jamshed Khan Khattak, Muhammad Arslan and Muhammad Umair Journal: E3 Journal of Business Management and Economics,Vol.2(5),2011--Pages192-199 Abstract: The aim of this study is to explore the current export challenges for SMEs in Pakistan and how these barriers affect the SMEs. One industry (textile) was selected for this study. 25 textile SMEs were selected for data collection. A structured interview was conducted for every SME. Each interview took 30 minutes. Findings of this study showed that internal barriers are more influential than external barriers. This study is limited to on industry i.e. textile industry. This study disseminates the attention of SMEs export managers towards the genuine and main problems coming across the SME exports so they can deal with these barriers to magnify their exports as internal barriers are more controllable as compared to external barriers. This study offers insights into SME export barriers in a (relatively under-researched) Pakistani context. Keywords: SMEs; Export Barriers; Textile., Pakistan. Citedy By: 12 Revisiting the Relationship Between Coal Consumption and Economic Growth: Cointegration and Causality Analysis in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.usc.es/economet/journals1/aeid/aeid12113.pdf Author: Muhammad Shahbaz, Smile Dube's Journal: Applied Econometrics and International Development,Vol.12(1),2012--Pages165-192 Abstract: The paper re-visits the relationship between coal consumption and economicgrowth by including other supporting variables such as capital use and labor participationrate in Pakistan over the 1972-2009 period. The paper adopts an augmented neoclassicalproduction framework. In doing so, for the long run relationship between the variables the ARDLbounds testing approach to cointegration is applied. The VECM Granger causality procedure is used to detect the direction of causality between coal consumption and economic growth while an innovative accounting approach is used to check the robustness of causality results. Empirical exercise confirms a long run relationship between the variables. The results suggest that coal consumption, capital use and the labor participation rate have positive impact on economic growth. Causality analysis indicates bidirectional causal relation between coal consumption and economic growth and results are robust through innovative accounting approach. This implies that energy(coal) conservation policies may retard economic growth that in turn lowers the demandof coal. Keywords: Coal Consumption, Economic Growth, Cointegration, Causality Analysis in Pakistan Citedy By: 14 Large-scale hybrid solar-hydrogen electric power plants for Pakistan [PDF] http://publications.aufwindkraftwerk.org/2003_Fawz-ul-Haq_Jilani_Haq_Large_Scale_Hybrid_Solar-Hydrogen_Electric_Power_Plants_for_Pakistan.pdf Author: Kalim R. Fawz-ul-Haq, Rahmatullah Jilani Journal: Proceedings International Hydrogen Energy Congress and Exhibition IHEC 2005 Istanbul, Turkey,Vol.(),2005--Pages Abstract: Pakistan has large-scale year-round cloud free, high sun areas, through which the perennial Indus River flows bringing voluminous water from the ice-capped mountains in the north. In this geography, pollution free, large-scale Solar-Hydrogen hybrid electric power plants, of the Solar-Tower type, can be established on the sunny plains at a safe distance from the river. In this paper, the basic technology to extract round-the-clock electric power, the location of such power plants and basic feasibility is discussed. Solar thermal system, inducing high speed up-draft wind, being the main turbine-rotating electricity generating configuration, hydrogen is proposed to be used as a back-up clean fuel. During solar active periods, along with direct generation of electricity, hydrogen could be produced by photoelectrolysis of the river water. During solar-wind inactive periods, electricity would be generated through hydrogen-based systems. Some modifications, to increase efficiency and usability of available options are also discussed. Keywords: Renewable energy, solar-tower, thermal wind, hydrogen, photoelectrolysis Citedy By: 6 Estimation and characterization of gaseous pollutant emissions from agricultural crop residue, combustion in industrial and household sectors of Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231013008960 Author: Muhammad Irfan, Muhammad Riaz, Muhammad Saleem Arif, Sher Muhammad Shahzad, Farhan Saleem Journal: Atmospheric Environment,Vol.84(),2014--Pages189-197 Abstract: A long-term energy crisis has resulted in increased combustion of biomass fuel in industrial and household sectors in Pakistan. We report results of a study on the emission characteristics of rice husk, rice straw, corncobs and bagasse since they are frequently used as biomass fuel and differed remarkably in physico-chemical and combustion characteristics. Emission concentrations and emission factors were determined experimentally by burning the biomass fuel using a burning tower. Modified combustion efficiency (MCE) of rice husk, rice straw, corncobs and bagasse was >0.97 indicating that combustion was dominated by flaming mode. Emission factors of gaseous pollutants CO, CO2, NO2, NO, NOx and SO2 for rice straw were calculated to be 17.19 0.28, 1090.07 24.0, 0.89 0.03, 1.48 0.04, 3.16 0.08 and 0.38 0.03 g kg1 respectively which were significantly (p < 0.05) higher compared to those from rice husk (14.05 0.18, 880.48 8.99, 0.19 0.01, 1.38 0.02, 2.31 0.04 and 0.11 0.03 g kg1), corncobs (8.63 0.12, 595.44 10.38, 0.16 0.01, 0.70 0.01, 1.23 0.02 and 0.02 0.00 g kg1) and bagasse (12.39 0.08, 937.03 9.07, 0.36 0.03, 1.44 0.02, 2.57 0.04 and 0.18 0.02 g kg1). Total emissions of CO, CO2, NO2, NO, NOx and SO2 were estimated to be 3.68, 230.51, 0.05, 0.36, 0.60 and 0.03 Gg for rice husk, 33.75, 2140.35, 1.75, 2.91, 6.20 and 0.75 Gg for rice straw, 1.11, 76.28, 0.02, 0.02 and 0.03 Gg for corncobs and 42.12, 3185.53, 1.22, 4.90, 8.74 and 0.61 Gg for bagasse respectively. Rice straw, however, had significantly (p < 0.05) higher potential of gaseous pollutant emission factors. Bagasse had the highest values of total emissions followed by rice straw, rice husk and corncobs. Rice straw and bagasse, on cumulative basis, contributed more than 90% of total emissions of gaseous pollutants. Results reported in this study are important in formulating provincial and regional emission budgets of gaseous pollutants from burning of agricultural residues in Pakistan. Keywords: Biomass fuel, Gaseous pollutants, Emission factors, Emission allocations, Agricultural crop residue, Emission inventory Citedy By: 17 Fertilizer and irrigation effects on forage protein and energy production under semi-arid conditions of Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378429014000112 Author: SamiUl-Allah, Asif Ali Khan, Thomas Fricke, Andreas Buerkert Journal: Field Crops Research,Vol.159(1),2014--Pages62-69 Abstract: Fertilizer and irrigation water are major inputs for forage production in semi-arid areas, and to ensure sustainability, nutrient and water efficient crop species should be used. The major objectives of the present study were to (i) evaluate the effect of crop species, fertilizer and irrigation on nutritive value and (ii) determine irrigation water use efficiency (IWUE) in terms of crude protein (CP) and metabolizeable energy (ME) production per unit of land. A two-year field experiment was conducted in Faisalabad, Pakistan, with a four times replicated completely randomized design in a split-plot arrangement of a combination of fertilizer treatment (control, farm yard manure (FYM) and mineral fertilizer (MIN)) and irrigation (recommended irrigation (RI), half recommended irrigation (HRI)) as main-plots. Sub-plots were assigned to two cropping systems Egyptian clover (Trifolium alexandrinum L.) followed by corn (Zea maysL.) (common cropping system, CCS) and the drought-adopted cropping system (DACS) oat (Avena sativa L.) followed by sudangrass (Andropogon sorghum subsp. drummondii). Crude protein concentration and IWUE of CP production per unit of land in CCS was 44 and 13% higher than in DACS, whereas ME contents and IWUE of ME production in DACS was 9.5 and 38% higher than in CCS. In view of ME as the major limiting nutritive property in roughages for feeding dairy cows, it is concluded that the tested DACS may be more suitable for sustainable forage production under water and nutrient limited conditions in semi-arid areas of Pakistan. Keywords: Fertilizer and irrigation, Cropping system, Nutritive value, Irrigation water use efficiency Citedy By: 5 Energy crisis and performance of industry of Pakistan: an empirical study [PDF] https://www.brookings.edu/on-the-record/the-united-states-and-russia-in-central-asia-uzbekistan-tajikistan-afghanistan-pakistan-and-iran/ Author: MI Abdullah, L Wei, W Anwar Journal: Bulletin of Energy Economics,Vol.1(3),2013--Pages21-27 Abstract: Before 1991, the states of Central Asia were marginal backwaters, republics of the Soviet Union that played no major role in the Cold War relationship between the USSR and the United States, or in the Soviet Unions relationship with the principal regional powers of Turkey, Iran, and China. But, in the 1990s, the dissolution of the Soviet Union coincided with the re-discovery of the energy resources of the Caspian Sea, attracting a range of international oil companies including American majors to the region. Eventually, the Caspian Basin became a point of tension in U.S.- Russian relations. In addition, Central Asia emerged as a zone of conflict. Violent clashes erupted between ethnic groups in the regions Ferghana Valley. Civil war in Tajikistan, in 1992- 1997, became entangled with war in Afghanistan. Faltering political and economic reforms, and mounting social problems provided a fertile ground for the germination of radical groups, the infiltration of foreign Islamic networks, and the spawning of militant organizations like the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU). The IMU first sought to overthrow the government of President Islam Karimov in Uzbekistan, later espoused greater ambitions for the creation of an Islamic caliphate (state) across Central Asia, and eventually joined forces with the Taliban in Afghanistan. With the events of September 11, 2001 and their roots in the terrorist groups operating in Afghanistan, Central Asia came to the forefront of U.S. attention. Keywords: Energy Crises, industry performance, Empirical study, Pakistan Citedy By: 3 Distribution of total and diffuse solar radiation at Lahore, Pakistan [PDF] http://results.pu.edu.pk/images/journal/chemistry/PDF-FILES/Paper%206_june%202010.pdf Author: M. Akhlaque Ahmed, Firoz Ahmed and Wasim Akhtar Journal: Journal of Scientific Research,Vol.(1),2010--Pages Abstract: In this research work the solar radiation for Lahore (Latitude31.56) has beenstudied for efficient utilization of solar energy employing sunshine hour data. The resultsobtained exhibit the variation of direct and diffuse radiation at Lahore. The diffuse radiation is maximum in the month of July and minimum during the month of April, Mayand June. The K Value indicates the clear sky during the month of January, February, tApril, May and September to December. Where as during the month of Jun to August thesky is mostly cloudy which is the monsoon month. From the estimated results it is foundthat with the exception of monsoon months solar energy can be utilized very efficientlythrough out the year. Keywords: Diffuse Radiation, Lahore, Solar Radiation, Sky Condition, Pakistan Citedy By: 6 Oil price volatility and its impact on economic growth in Pakistan [PDF] http://pubs.sciepub.com/jfe/1/4/2/ Author: Muhammad Jawad Journal: Journal of Finance and Economics,Vol.1(4),2013--Pages62-68 Abstract: The main objective of this research is to analyze the impact of oil price volatility on the economic growth of Pakistan. Secondary data from 1973 to 2011 were used to estimate the coefficients. Linear Regression analysis is used to analyze the dependency among the dependant and independent variables. All variable Oil price, Oil supply, oil demand, Gross Domestic production, Public sector investment, private sector investment and Trade balance is stationary at 1st Difference through ADF test. Trade Balance, Private sector investments have a significant effect on Gross domestic production and Public sector investment, Oil price volatility has insignificant impact on Gross domestic production. Government should make a proper plan and procedure according to Pakistans economic growth and requirement which would help to maintain the equilibrium of oil demand and supply and decreased the impact of oil price volatility on the economic growth. Meanwhile, the government of Pakistan also focused on its trade balance and also tries to increase private sector investment to increase its economic growth. Keywords: oil price volatility, linear regression, macroeconomic variables, economic growth of Pakistan Citedy By: 10 Status of Petroleum Sector In Pakistan - A Review [PDF] http://www.ogbus.ru/eng/authors/AdeelAhmad/AdeelAhmad_1.pdf Author: Adeel Ahmad, Mithilesh Kumar Jha Journal: Oil and Gas Business Journal,Vol.(1),2008--Pages Abstract: Pakistan economy is growing steadily. This growth demands higher energy consumption and consequently putting high pressure on countries economy. Pakistan mainly depends upon oil and gas resources to fulfil energy requirements .Indigenous resources of Oil are not enough to quench energy thirst of the growing economy. As a result Pakistan has to import large quantity of oil and oil based products from Middle East countries. Gas reserves in the country are enough for current gas requirements. So natural gas is playing a key role in power sector. Currently in oil upstream and down stream sector there are some local and international companies involved and government of Pakistan is establishing such policies that it can attract more international investors in this sector but the rapid pace of change, high degree of uncertainty and unstable political situation of the country present significant challenges and risk to foreign investment .Objective of this paper to highlight the present status of petroleum industry in Pakistan and its future prospects keeping in view the internal fluid situation and geopolitical condition of the region. Keywords: Hydrocarbon, Compressed Natural Gas, Petroleum. Pakistan Citedy By: 7 Estimation and comparison of diffuse solar radiation over Pakistan [PDF] http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.618.7951&rep=rep1&type=pdf Author: SZ Ilyas, SM Nasir, S Kakac Journal: Int. Sci. Journal for Alternative Energy and Ecology,Vol.13(47),2007--Pages Abstract: Measured data of solar radiation for 19842003 are presented. The monthly averages of hourly and annual variation of solar radiation are calculated. Estimated values of diffuse radiation to total solar radiation using different correlation ships developed by Page, Iqbal, Liu and Jordan, and Hay are presented. These models are then compared by estimating diffuse irradiation values for different locations over Pakistan. Keywords: diffuse solar radiation, Pakistan, radiation data Citedy By: 1 Passthrough of global inflation to domestic inflation: An empirical evidence for Pakistan [PDF] http://www.qurtuba.edu.pk/jms/default_files/JMS/7_1/JMS_January_June2013_105-111.pdf Author: Atif Ali Jaffri, Rooma Asjed & Samra Bashir Journal: Journal of Managerial Sciences,Vol.VII(1),2013--Pages105-111 Abstract: This study has estimated passthrough of global food and energy inflation to CPI inflation in Pakistan for the period 1993M2 to 2012M2. The study has applied Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test to check stationarity of data before applying Ordinary Least Square (OLS) technique. The estimation results showed that global inflation in food, industrial inputs and energy price indices positively and significantly affect inflation in Pakistan in the long run. The empirical estimates of long run passthrough of foreign food and energy inflation to domestic inflation are consistent with recent studies for developing countries. On the basis of estimation results, the study recommends prudent use of monetary policy in coordination with fiscal policy to control pssthrough of foreign inflation to domestic inflation in Pakistan. Keywords: Inflation, Food Inflation, Energy Inflation, Pakistan Citedy By: 6 Evaluation by implementation of distribution system planning for energy loss reduction [PDF] http://www.uet.edu.pk/research/researchinfo/journal/volume4/1-PP-5.pdf Author: S. A. Qureshi and F. Mahmood Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.4(),2009--Pages43-55 Abstract: In recent years the nature of load has changed drastically and different electrical machinery i.e. mercury lamps, transformers, motors, switchgears are running inherently at low power factor. This means that power supply authorities have to generate much more current that is theoretically required. This high current level in our system needs to be reduced and efforts should be made to make the system more energy handling with minimum cost involved. This includes different techniques such as improving power factor, changing conductor size, substituting cables with conductors etc. The main objective of this research is to develop methodology and guide lines for distribution engineers to show that by reducing the energy losses of distribution system, available capacity of the system may be conserved without putting up additional capacity. A generalized computer program is used to evaluate any given HT/LT system and propose capacitor banks at different points, different conductor sizes in different portions of system. This results in improving the stability as well as energy handling capacity of the system at minimum cost. Keywords: distribution system planning, energy loss reduction, Rehabilitation Citedy By: 12 Agricultural Input Use Efficiency in Pakistan: Key Issues and Reform Areas [PDF] http://ftpmirror.your.org/pub/wikimedia/images/wikipedia/commons/3/36/Agriculture_Input_Efficiency_in_Pakistan.pdf Author: Naila Afzal and Dr. Shahid Ahmad Journal: Research Briefings - Managing Natural Resources for Sustaining,Vol.1(3),2009--Pages1-12 Abstract: Agriculture sector in Pakistan provides employment opportunities to more than 60 percent of the countrys population. It also provides food to around 162 million people and supports earning of foreign exchange. The profitability of irrigated agriculture is now declining as the input prices are growing at a rapid rate. The good examples are energy and fertilizers, where rise in electric tariff, diesel prices and prices of phosphatic fertilizers is going to have negative impacts on the profitability of irrigated agriculture. Thus, in the present scenario of food security and export of commodities not only output but also input analysis is necessary. This paper is the first approximation of conducting the input-output analysis where unit gross value production was estimated to indirectly analyze the input use efficiency at current factor price. This analysis is based on the past trends of inputs availability and their relationship with the Gross Value Production. In future, more systematic analysis can be made where primary data can be collected on canal command basis using diagnostic studies. Keywords: Energy, Agriculture, Reform Areas Pakistan Citedy By: 9 Impact of electricity shortage on daily routines: A case study of Pakistan [PDF] http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1260/0958-305X.24.5.701 Author: Rab Nawaz Lodhi, Dr. R. K. Malik Journal: Energy & Environment,Vol.24(5),2013--Pages701-709 Abstract: People in Pakistan are facing many problems due to load shedding which is a result of electricity shortages. This study investigated the consequences of electricity shortage on daily routines and overall performance of people in Pakistan. Data has been collected through video recorded interviews and written comment-based interviews using a social network of Face Book as suggested by QSR-International (2012). Sample includes students, housewives, professional workers and businessmen who are living in Pakistan. The study identified 22 different results of electricity shortage in daily routines of people in Pakistan. Sleeplessness, incompletion of tasks, use of alternative resources and inefficient learning have been found to be the more critical results of electricity shortage. Furthermore, these consequences of electricity shortage can be divided into social and psychological problems. It is concluded that the shortage of electricity has changed the lives of people in Pakistan irrespective of their professions. Keywords: electricity shortage, load shedding, Pakistan Citedy By: 6 Health and road transport in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003335060500106X Author: AA Hyder, AA Ghaffar, DE Sugerman, TI Masood, L Ali Journal: Public Health,Vol.120(2),2006--Pages132-141 Abstract: The 1998 Global Burden of Disease Study estimated that road traffic injuries (RTIs) will become the third leading cause of lost disability-adjusted life years, with two-thirds of the deaths occurring in the least developed nations. Moreover, automobile-based transport systems are associated with air pollution (lead toxicity, asthma and greenhouse gas accumulation), noise disturbances, physical inactivity and obesity. Study design This study (1) reviewed road transport literature in Pakistan and the impacts on health outcomes; (2) examined health policies to assess their focus on transport-related health problems; and (3) identified policy gaps for future research.MethodsA methodological review of the literature on direct and indirect effects of road transportation in Pakistan. This review includes government documents, memos, statements and draft policies as well as relevant articles indexed in MEDLINE.ResultsA systematic review revealed no approved transport policy in Pakistan, despite three national health policy documents. The Health Chapter of the 9th Five Year Plan appreciates the grave threat of unchecked RTI, but fails to offer specific policy interventions. Despite ambitious plans by the Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency, actual projects and their implementation remain scarce, resulting in ever-increasing air pollution. The health impact of lead toxicity, noise pollution and RTIs remain high, while obesity is on the rise.ConclusionThe increasing health impact of road transport on 140 million people calls for immediate policy action.Governmentagenciesmust intervene effectively to establish monitoring and decentralised enforcement nationwide, while simultaneously supporting alternative modes of transportation. Keywords: Pakistan, Road-based transport, Cars, Health Citedy By: 27 Energy Planning In Pakistan: Problems and Prospects [PDF] http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1477-8947.1982.tb01020.x/full Author: Abu Mohammad Izharul Haque Journal: Natural Resources Forum,Vol.6(1),1982--Pages63-79 Abstract: The per capita consumption of commercial energy and electricity in Pakistan in 1978 was 0.2 tons of coal equivalent (TCE) and 180 kW-h respectively, that is, about half of the average for developing countries, 10 per cent of the world average and about 1.7 per cent of US consumption.About 10,000 barrels per day, roughly 10 per cent of domestic consumption is produced indigenously, the rest being imported mainly in the form of crude oil, diesel fuel and kerosene. Although the volume of imports has increased at a rate of only 5.2 per cent per annum, as a result of price increases Pakistan's import bill has gone from $611 million in 19781979 to $1.58 billion in 19801981.The Fifth Five-Year Plan (19781983) enumerated policy strategies for power and fuel. Regarding power, maximum priority was given to hydroelectric generation conserving fuel through use of extra-high voltage transmission lines, reduction of system losses, expansion of village electrification, and putting power corporations on a sound financial basis. As regards fuel, the plan stresses exploration for new oil and gas fields, accelerated development of proven fields, expansion of gas consumption for industrial use, strengthening of transport and storage of oil and research and development on non-conventional sources of energy. $3.39 billion was allocated to the energy sector. This represents 22.6 per cent of public sector funding.The National Energy Policy Committee regulary reviews the energy situation in the country with a view to effecting proper development and utilization of energy resources. Keywords: Energy Planning, Pakistan, Energy consumption, Electricity, Problems, Prospects Citedy By: 3 Determination of gamma-emitting radionuclides in the inter-tidal sediments off Balochistan (Pakistan) Coast, Arabian Sea [PDF] https://academic.oup.com/rpd/article-abstract/123/2/268/1600425/Determination-of-gamma-emitting-radionuclides-in?redirectedFrom=fulltext Author: M. Akram, Riffat M. Qureshi, Nasir Ahmad, Tariq Jamal Solaija Journal: Radiation Protection Dosimetry,Vol.123(2),2007--Pages268-273 Abstract: Natural radionuclide contents of 226Ra, 228Ra and 40K were studied for inter-tidal sediments collected from selected locations off the745 km long Balochistan Coast using HPGe detector based gamma-spectrometry system. The sampling zone extends from the beaches of Sonmiani (near Karachi metropolis) through Jiwani (close to the border of Iran). The natural radioactivity levels detected in various sediment samples range from 14.42.5 to 36.63.8 Bq kg1 for 226Ra, 9.81.2 to 35.22.0 Bq kg1 for 228Ra and 144.69.4 to 610.523.9 Bq kg1 for 40K. No artificial radionuclide was detected in any of the marine coastal sediment samples. 137Cs, 60Co, 106Ru and 144Ce contents in sediment samples were below the limit of detection. The measured radioactivity levels are compared with those reported in the literature for coastal sediments in other parts of the world. The information presented in this paper will serve as the first ever local radioactivity database for the Balochistan/Makran Coastal belt of Pakistan. The presented data will also contribute to the IAEA's, Asia-Pacific Marine Radioactivity Database (ASPAMARD) and the Global Marine Radioactivity Database (GLOMARD). Keywords: gamma-emitting radionuclides, inter-tidal sediments, Balochistan coast, Arabian Sea Pakistan Citedy By: 12 Transfer of radioactivity from soil to vegetation in Rechna Doab, Pakistan [PDF] https://www.researchgate.net/publication/49679611_Transfer_of_radioactivity_from_soil_to_vegetation_in_Rechna_Doab_Pakistan Author: Abdul Jabbar, Muhammad Tufail, Waheed Arshed, Muhammad Dilband Journal: Isotopes in Environmental and Health Studies,Vol.46(4),2010--Pages495-505 Abstract: In Rechna Doab, samples of the most common vegetation, perennial grass Desmostachya bipinnata (dab), were collected along with soil samples from 29 sites. Natural radioactivity of 226Ra, 232Th/228Ac and 40K was measured by using high purity germanium-based gamma ray spectrometer. Activity concentration levels of 226Ra, 232Th/228Ac and40K in soil were found to be 46.86.2 (36.057.6), 61.45.9 (48.273.2) and 644.873.9 (537.7868.4) Bq kg1 (dry mass), respectively, and those in vegetation were 2.741.70 (1.006.39), 2.240.59 (1.562.61) and 172.72113.37 (53.14469.24) Bq kg1 (dry mass), respectively. The measured values of the activity concentration in vegetation are comparable with some other international data. Calculated soil to vegetation transfer factors of 226Ra, 228Ac and 40K were 0.060.03 (0.020.14), 0.040.01 (0.030.04) and 0.260.16 (0.090.69). The mean outdoor absorbed dose rate in air for the area under study was determined as 8.22 nGy h1 and the mean indoor absorbed dose rate in air was 11.52 nGy h1. The total annual effective dose to the general public from the vegetation was found to be (0.020.16) mSv, which is below the recommended limit value of 1 mSv y1 for the general public. The dab vegetation under study was found to be radiologically safe for the population and environment. Keywords: Radioactivity, soil, vegetation, Rechna Doab, Pakistan Citedy By: 15 Marine resources in Pakistan: A tentative inventory [PDF] http://sustainableinitiatives.org.pk/da/Government%20Documents/Research%20Doucment/Marine%20Resources%20In%20Pakistan%20NIO.pdf Author: Nuzhat Khan Journal: Pakistan Business Review,Vol.(),2011--Pages834-843 Abstract: Resources are being continuously removed from the earth due to high growth rates of human population. Many ofthese resources are non-renewable such as fossil fuels, minerals etc. and may be close to exhaustion due to unsustainableexploitation that results in an increase in food shortages, especially in protein food products. Non-renewable energy sources are also dwindling. In recent years emphasis has been laid on identifying renewable resources. The Sindh coastalzone has great potential of both living and non-living resources. Most of these are largely under-exploited and to someextentunexplored. This paper attempts to describe the estimated potential of variousmarine resources and their present level of exploitation andconservation in Pakistan. Keywords: non-renewable, renewable resources, fossil fuels, marine energy sources, Pakistan Citedy By: 5 Energy Analysis of Roof Integrated Solar Collector for Domestic Heating & Cooling Under Local Conditions of Pakistan [PDF] http://www.ijrer.org/ijrer/index.php/ijrer/article/view/408/pdf Author: Muhammad Imran, Hameed Ullah Mughal Journal: International Journal of Renewable Energy Research-IJRER ,Vol.3(1),2013--Pages13-19 Abstract: Household utilization of energy represents the 46% of Pakistan total energy. This situation requires that new energy model & alternates of energy should be developed for the household utilization of energy. Solar Energy is one of the best available options for this problem. Many designs of solar roof have been developed in the last half century to utilize solar energy from the roof. The previous designs are feasible but their design is complex and their performance. A model of Roof Integrated Solar collector is designed & fabricated. The dimensions of collector are 5 feet long, 4 feet wide & 0.5 feet height. Experimental readings are taken at various times of the day. The effect of orientation is also studied experimentally. Economic analysis is performed for different scheme of solar collector using linear economical approach. Energy Analysis shows that Roof Integrated Solar collector has a very healthy potential for solar thermal application as it has almost 37 % efficiency. The major loss occurs in solar collector. The life cost analysis shows that the cost of Roof Integrated Solar collector is very economical as compared to electric water heater, gas water heater or solar thermal water heater. Energy distribution analysis shows that 37% energy is transferred to water, 32 % is reflected back & 22 % is transferred to the atmosphere through collector walls & base & the rest of 9% is absorbed by the collector surface. Keywords: Energy Analysis, Solar Energy, Roof integrated Solar Collector, Economical assessment, Pakistan Citedy By: 3 Parametric tests of allocative efficiency in the manufacturing sectors of India and Pakistan [PDF] http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/000368497327353 Author: Abid A. Burki , Mushtaq A. Khan & Bernt Bratsberg Journal: Applied Economics,Vol.29(1),1997--Pages11-22 Abstract: This paper estimates allocative inefficiency in the manufacturing sectors of India and Pakistan. Based on an extension of the translog profit function approach, we propose a new method to the estimation of allocative inefficiency in two countries (or groups). The model is estimated using pooled annual data from the large scale manufacturing sectors of India and Pakistan over the period 195987. We find evidence of allocative inefficiencies in both countries. Specifically, results reveal that manufacturing firms in the two countries over-utilize capital and raw materials relative to labour and energy. The magnitude of over-utilization of capital is more severe in Pakistan than in India. We argue that these findings are hardly surprising given the structure of factor markets and past government policies in the two countries. Keywords: Energy, labour, industrial activity, manufacturing sectors, Pakistan, India Citedy By: 23 Parametric tests of allocative efficiency in the manufacturing sectors of India and Pakistan [PDF] https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235973489_Electric_power_consumption_foreign_direct_investment_and_economic_growth_-_A_comparative_study_of_India_and_Pakistan Author: Abdullah Alam Journal: World Journal of Science, Technology and and Sustainable Development,Vol.10(1),2013--Pages Abstract: The purpose of this paper is to find potential causality and comparative relationships between electric power consumption, foreign direct investment and economic growth for India and Pakistan. Design/methodology/approach Granger causality tests have been employed for estimating the short and long run relationships between the variables, along with the adoption of cointegration and error correction mechanism. FindingsEmpirical evidence for India covering a period of 19752008 indicates long run causalities for electric power consumption and foreign direct investment boosting economic growth, electric power consumption and economic growth impacting foreign direct investment. For Pakistan, causality was established for foreign direct investment and economic growth inducing electric power consumption in the long run. Practical implications For India, there is a strong need of policy that would guarantee secure and continued supply of electricity, as enhanced electric consumption is expected to boost foreign direct investment and economic growth. Pakistan should aim for costeffective, stable and environment friendly alternate to fossil fuels as the main source of its electric power generation. Keywords: India, Pakistan, National economy, Economic growth, International investments, Electric power consumption, Foreign direct investment,Energy economics Citedy By: 3 Economic feasibility of stand-alone wind energy hybrid with bioenergy from anaerobic digestion for electrification of remote area of Pakistan, [PDF] http://penerbit.uthm.edu.my/ojs/index.php/ijie/article/view/1026 Author: Abdur Raheem, Mohammad Yusri Hassan, Rabia Shakoor Journal: Journal of Integrated Engineering,Vol.6(3),2014--Pages1-8 Abstract: Hybrid Renewable Energy systems (HRES) are gaining importance throughout the world because of the finite sources of oil and gas reservoirs. These have the great ability in the production of electrical energy and cleaning the environment. It is difficult to get grid electricity in the remote areas where no infrastructure exists. The utilization of renewable sources is the ultimate solution for the generation of electricity. In this paper, the economic modeling of Hybrid system consisting of Wind/biomass is explored for the remote area Jangiah of Balochistan province, Pakistan. Anaerobic Digestion of biomass is used to get biogas. This source is used to complement the uncertainties in the wind production. Homer is used to simulate the hybrid model. Economic analysis is performed to get the net present value (NPV) and cost of energy. It is observed that wind/biomass alone is capable to meet the demand of community which consumes 60 kW peak daily along with the storage backup. This system is the most economical with COE equal to 0.118 US$/kWh following the hybrid biomass/wind/diesel system with COE 0.202 US$/kWh. The sensitivity analysis is carried out and shows that the proposed system is sensitive to the prices of fossil fuel and project lifespan. The net present value increases as the lifetime of the project increases from 15 years to 30 years. It can also be concluded that if the price of the diesel drops below 0.8 US$/liter, the traditional system using fossil fuels will become the most suitable system for the generation of electricity in remote areas. Keywords: Bioenergy; Hybrid Renewable Energy system; Homer; Wind turbine; Pakistan; Cost of energy Citedy By: 3 Role of changing energy pricing policies on energy pricing policies in Pakistan [PDF] https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Asad_Qureshi2/publication/240638604_Effect_of_Electricity_Pricing_Policies_on_Groundwater_Management_in_Pakistan/links/5570aa0508aef8e8dc62fad8/Effect-of-Electricity-Pricing-Policies-on-Groundwater-Management-in-P Author: Asad Sarwar Qureshi, Mujeeb Akhtar and Tushaar Shah Journal: Pakistan Journal of Applied Irrigation Science ,Vol.39(2),2004--Pages329-342 Abstract: Profitability of irrigated agriculture based on pumped water systems is now a serious question faced by the farming community in Pakistan. According to an estimate, the number of groundwater structures has increased to over 0.6 million and more than 80 percent are driven by the diesel engines. Diesel is an imported commodity and is considered a source of pollution in the rural environment. The electric pump sets, which make less than 20 percent of the total tube well population, are considered the most efficient, environmental friendly, and low in operating and maintenance costs. However, higher cost of the electric connection and changing energy pricing policies makes it unaffordable for the farming communities in Pakistan. In Pakistan, electrification of private tube wells was started in 1970s when the base installation costs were borne by the Government. Until 1991, farmers were only charged on the basis of actual electricity consumed. In 1991, flat rate pricing policy was introduced to give relief to the farmers. This decision gave farmers unlimited access to groundwater, which resulted in wastage of energy and over-exploitation of groundwater. Moreover, tube well connections were also miss-used by the farmers. Considering this alarming situation and losses to the national economy, this policy was withdrawn and new flat-cum-metered tariff policy was introduced. The results of this policy still have to be seen. What the energy irrigation nexus in Pakistan has to contend with is a result of this coaxed demand creation; doing so requires dealing with a large complex of issues; however, the most burning has been the issue of electricity pricing and supply to agriculture. The choice is between two pricing regimes; government-owned power utilities have shuttled back and forth between metered and flat rate pricing regimes. Pakistan switched from metered tariff to flat rate regime; switched back to metered tariff regime and has now settled with flat-cum-metered tariff regime, a mongrel that probably combines the worst features of both. This paper highlighted the impacts of changing energy policies on groundwater development and management in Pakistan. Keywords: Energy pricing policies, energy pricing policies, Pakistan Citedy By: 3 Gamma-ray activity and dose rate of brick samples from some areas of North West Frontier Province [PDF] https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8711467 Author: SafdarAli, M.Tufail, KhalidJamil, Abid Ahmad ,H.A.Khan Journal: Science of the total Environment,Vol.187(3),1996--Pages247-252 Abstract: It is important to measure natural radioactivity due to -rays from building materials and consequently to determine the dose rate from these materials. This helps to implement precautionary measures whenever the dose rate is found to be above the recommended limits.A knowledge of gamma radioactivity is required by the building construction association to adopt preventive measures to mitigate or minimize the harmful effects of ionizing radiation. The aim of this work was to measure the gamma activity due to 226Ra, 232Th and 40K in bricks from the Peshawar, Nowshera and Mardan districts of NWFP of Pakistan. The radiological doses to the occupants from the brick floor of a wooden house were calculated. The average dose equivalent rate was calculated to be 0.14 mSv per year, which is well below the external dose limit of 0.46 mSv per year as given in UNSCEAR [2]. Keywords: Natural radioactivity, Bricks, Pakistan, Building construction, North West Frontier Province Citedy By: 51 Agricultural Waste Biomass Energy Potential in Pakistan [PDF] http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/98565/1/1%20CO%201%202%20.pdf Author: MA Saeed, A Irshad, H Sattar Journal: Proceedings of the International Bioenergy Exhibition and Asian Bioenergy Conference,Vol.(),2015--Pages Abstract: Pakistan has a major electricity supply problem with urban areas having a very intermittent supply of electricity. The supply gap at periods of high demand is 6 GW. Pakistan has a large agricultural economic sector and produces a substantial amount of waste material that has little current economic use. This work shows that these agricultural wastes are a significant energy resource that could be used to generate electricity using relatively small biomass generator sets that could take all the waste biomass from the surrounding agricultural area. Pakistan currently imports most of the oil used for electricity generation. The cost of this result in high cost electricity and it is shown that bio-electricity could be generated competitively in Pakistan. It was estimated, based on 30% thermal efficiency of electric power generation, that the annual production of crop residues have the potential to generate 76% of the annual electricity requirements of Pakistan. For this to come from agricultural wastes in farmland, transport costs would have to be minimised. It is proposed that a series of about 10MWe plants should be established (which are commercially available) with all farms in about a 10km radius delivering their agricultural solid waste to the plant at the farmers cost with direct payment by the power generator. Keywords: Agricultural Waste, Biomass, Energy Potential, Pakistan Citedy By: 3 A study on the washability of the Azad Kashmir (Pakistan) coalfield [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378382012000598 Author: Saqib Nasir, Jiri Kucerik, ZahidMahmood Journal: Fuel Processing Technology,Vol.99(),2012--Pages75-81 Abstract: Pre-combustion coal cleaning is one of the most effective methods for removing unwanted minerals and pollutants. Coals are cleaned at the mine site using water-based processes to remove non-combustible minerals and to lower the concentration of pollutants such as sulfur. This paper summarizes the washability study conducted under the coal quality evaluation and beneficiation project of Azad Kashmir (Pakistan) coalfield. The aim of the study was to investigate and interpret washability characteristics of Kotli coalfields. Washability parameters such as degree of washing and washability number were also calculated and compared. The coal samples of Kashmir coalfield belong to lignite (LigB) to high volatile bituminous (hvCb) category on the basis of proximate and gross calorific value analysis containing 8.80 to 85.2% ash, 4.70 to 85.7% fixed carbon and 4.63 to 34.3%, volatile matter. The majority of coal samples under investigation were found amenable to washing using gravity separation. As a result of present investigation 21.6, 22.4, 9.0, 52.1 and 42.3% of ash in the raw coal could be reduced to 7.7, 9.2, 4.8, 5.4 and 10.0% cumulative ash for the five samples. The optimum grade recovery conditions are also discussed in this paper. Keywords: Coal, Proximate analysism, Washability, Demineralization, Beneficiation, Azad Kashmir, Pakistan Citedy By: 9 The IranPakistanIndia Natural Gas Pipeline: Implications and Challenges for Regional Security [PDF] https://www.researchgate.net/publication/247526700_The_Iran-Pakistan-India_Natural_Gas_Pipeline_Implications_and_Challenges_for_Regional_Security Author: Anjali Sahay, Jalil Roshandel Journal: Strategic Analysis,Vol.34(1),2010--Pages Abstract: This research article examines the rationale for Iran, Pakistan, and India entering into a trade agreement to meet their economic, political, and strategic needs as well as the constraints and challenges that still hamper such an agreement from realizing its full potential. Using the gas pipeline project as a case study, the issues of energy security (as the independent variable) and of economic interdependence (as the dependent variable) highlight the importance of cooperation among these countries. The Iran-Pakistan-India Natural Gas Pipeline: Implications and Challenges for Regional Security. Available from: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/247526700_The_Iran-Pakistan-India_Natural_Gas_Pipeline_Implications_and_Challenges_for_Regional_Security [accessed Sep 15, 2017]. Keywords: IranPakistanIndia Gas Pipeline, challenges, regional security Citedy By: 8 Determination of total suspended particulate matter and heavy metals in ambient air of four cities of Pakistan [PDF] https://idosi.org/ijee/2(2)11/4.pdf Author: Muhammad Ali Awan, Syed Hassan Ahmed, Muhammad Rizwan Aslam and Ishtiaq Ahmed Qazi Journal: Iranica Journal of Energy & Environment ,Vol.2(2),2011--Pages128-132 Abstract: Total suspended particulates (TSPs) in ambient air of four cities of Pakistan were collected using ahigh volume sampling technique for subsequent heavy metal analysis. The sampling was conducted for 24hours and the concentration of TSPs ranged 568-2074, 1191-3976, 1133-4400 and 112-280 g/m3 for Islamabad,Gujranwala, Faisalabad and Bahwalnagar, respectively. The level of TSP contamination was very high inambient air of two big industrial cities, Gujranwala and Faisalabad. TSPs were also analyzed for Cd, Pb and Znusing flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) following digestionusing a mixture of analytical gradenitric acid and hydrochloric acid. Compared to other metals, concentration of Cd was slightly high (around 325ng/m3) in the samples of Gujranwala and Faisalabad. Overall, the order of metal concentrations were Cd > Pb> Zn. Keywords: Total suspended particles % Particulate heavy metals % Cadmium % Lead % Zinc, Pakistan Citedy By: 1 Extending Technology Roadmap through Fuzzy Cognitive Map-based Scenarios: The Case of the Wind Energy Sector of Pakistan [PDF] http://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/open_access_etds/999/ Author: Muhammad Amer Journal: DISSERTATIONS AND THESES,Vol.(),2013--Pages Abstract: In this modern era, energy is a key element required for sustainable development and prosperity of a society. Pakistan is an energy deficient country facing problems due to the shortage of over 4000 MW of electricity. The national energy sector is heavily dependent on imported fossil-fuel resources. The energy crisis is negatively affecting all economic and business activities, and it is widely recognized as a severe obstacle to growth and poverty reduction in the country. Establishment of wind farms can help to overcome the energy crisis.In this research, a national level wind energy roadmap is developed through scenario planning. Multiple future scenarios are developed using the fuzzy cognitive maps (FCM) approach. This research has extended technology roadmapping through FCM-based scenario analysis. Building scenarios with FCM is a very new approach, and for the first time FCM-based scenarios are developed for the wind energy sector of Pakistan. Based on these multiple scenarios, a technology roadmap has been developed. This research approach is applied to the wind energy sector of Pakistan as a case study.This approach has been used to establish objectives and national targets of the roadmap. Then in a systematic way, critical roadmap barriers are identified against each scenario, and appropriate action items have been proposed to overcome barriers and promote deployment of wind energy projects in Pakistan. The objectives and targets of the roadmap have been translated into action items. The technology roadmap has four layers: strategic objectives, targets, barriers, and action items. Expert panels have been utilized to develop scenarios and technology roadmaps. Validation of this research is also carried out using experts. This new approach has helped to develop a robust roadmap and enabled anticipation of a wide range of possible future outcomes.This research fills an important gap by combining scenario planning and technology roadmapping techniques in future studies, and it has enhanced flexibility of the developed roadmap. Moreover, for the first time multiple and plausible FCM-based scenarios are developed, which combine the benefits of both qualitative and quantitative analysis. Moreover, the technology roadmap for the wind energy sector of Pakistan is developed with a comprehensive study of practical obstacles and barriers towards deployment of wind energy technology. The research findings suggest that policy, financial, economic, lack of competition with conventional power plants, and technical are the most critical barriers towards deployment of wind energy projects in the country. Appropriate action items required to overcome the roadmap barriers against each scenario are also proposed in the developed roadmap. The experts also assigned responsibilities for the key roadmap action items to the major stakeholders. Keywords: Fuzzy Cognitive Map, Wind Energy, Pakistan, Technology Application Citedy By: 3 Studies and applications of nuclear tracks in solids in basic science and technology in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1350448708001583 Author: H.A.Khan, I.E.Qureshi, E.U.Khan Journal: Radiation Measurements,Vol.43(),2008--Pages571-577 Abstract: The solid state nuclear track detection (SSNTD) technique is now a well-established tool for the detection of charged particles with stopping power greater than a certain threshold value. Being a passive detection system, it existed in the form of primordial crystals and hence qualified to be regarded as the oldest member of the nuclear detection systems. Since the advent of its laboratory use in 1958, the technique was adopted by different laboratories at different times all over the world. Pakistan is one of the countries that established an SSNTD-laboratory in the earliest developmental stage of the technique. Consequently, significant contributions were made by a small but energetic group of scientists toward the methodology of the technique as well as its applications in diverse areas such as nuclear physics, cosmology, material science, geology, geophysics, bio-medical physics and environmental science. In this article we will attempt to present a brief summary of the important advances made in the development of this technique and its innovative applications by Pakistani researchers in various fields of science and technology.As elsewhere in the world, the technique is not ubiquitous in all nuclear research laboratories in Pakistan because of the well-known limitations of the detection system. However, the number of workers involved in research studies has been growing over the years. These included both the fresh researchers as well as those who shifted from other research interests. This has resulted in a healthy reinforcement of the manpower engaged in SSNTD-based research work. After a selective presentation of the on-going investigations based on the use of SSNTDs in Pakistan, some comments are made for the possible future directions of progress.To put the Pakistani experience in international perspective, it is emphasized that the unique features of SSNTDs are facing serious challenges from rapid advances in high precision electronic detectors. The continued vitality of SSNTDs can be ensured through standardized detector materials and low cost automatic measuring systems. Keywords: SSNTD technique, Pakistan, Nuclear physics, Cosmology, Material science, Geology, Geophysics, Bio-medical physics, Environmental science Citedy By: 9 Indigenous Plants Based Biodiesel Resources in Pakistan [PDF] http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1028&context=ebl Author: Mushtaq Ahmad, Mir Ajar Khan, Muhammad Zafar, Shazia Sultana and Sobia Gulzar Journal: Ethnobotanical Leaflets ,Vol.(),2007--Pages224-230 Abstract: Biodiesel is an emerging solution for the present day concerns about rising oil prices and depletion of fossil fuel resources throughout the world. In current scenario due to shortage of energy resources, biodiesel is very good option for energy security in Pakistan. There are large arable lands with good climatic conditions for large biomass production of biodiesel yielding species. In this study data is compiled to identify plant species bearing seeds rich in oil for biodiesel production. Among them the most important are Pongamia pinnata, Brassica spp. and Ricinus communis. Bio fuel reduce dependence onimported petroleum with associated political and economic vulnerability,reduce green house gas emissions and other pollutants, and revitalize theeconomy by increasing demand and prices for agricultural products. This paper suggests decision makers ingovernment of Pakistan to take initiative todevelop project for commercial production of biodiesel by using indigenous plants based resources. Keywords: Indigenous plants, biodiesel, Pakistan Citedy By: 5 Testing the relationship between electricity supply, development of industrial sector and economic growth: An empirical analysis using time series data for Pakistan [PDF] http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17509653.2011.10671173 Author: Nazima Ellahi Journal: International Journal of Management Science and Engineering Mnagement,Vol.6(4),2011--Pages272-277 Abstract: Industrial sector of a country is an engine to economic growth, a sustained and incessant supply of electricity is an important determinant of industrial sector performance, which further contributes to better growth of economic indicators. This research study analyzes the joint role of electricity supply and industrial sector development for economic growth of Pakistan, moreover it also finds the impact of electricity shortage on overall economic growth. Theoretically this study is based on endogenous growth model, and empirically it applies Auto Regressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) approach to find short run as well as longrun estimates. Major findings of the study include that labor, capital, electricity supply and industrial sector development play an important role for improving the economic growth of Pakistan and shortage of electricity results in dismal performance of industrial sector. Major recommendations include that, despite there are policies and incentives in the industrial sector, it cannot be improved or contribute to economic growth, unless the problem of electricity is fixed. Keywords: electricity supply, industrial sector, economic growth, Pakistan Citedy By: 8 Pakistan and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization [PDF] https://www.researchgate.net/publication/254216991_Wind_energy_potential_in_Pakistan Author: Mahmood H. Nagrial's Journal: International journal of ambient energy,Vol.5(2),1984--Pages97-100 Abstract: This paper is aimed at indicating the wind power potential in Pakistan. The mean wind speed data for 17 locations has been obtained from meteorological measurements over a period of 30 years. Rayleigh distribution has been employed to predict the wind power potential. It has been found that the southern and south-western parts of the country has exploitable wind power potential. Keywords: Wind energy, Pakistan, wind power potential, Rayleigh distribution Citedy By: 3 Discussion on Sino-Pakistan Energy Cooperation [PDF] http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTOTAL-YNCM201201011.htm Author: CHEN Li-jun Journal: Journal of Yunnan University of Finance and Economics,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: China and Pakistan are friendly neighbors with adjacent territory,and the diplomatic relationship of the two countries is one of the most important bilateral relationships of China.At present,China and Pakistan have established "round-the clock" strategic cooperation partnerships with each other.Propelled by good political relations,the economic and trade cooperation and energy cooperation between the two countries continue to advance forward.By taking the opportunity of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries for 60 years,the promotion of energy cooperation between the two countries from a new beginning will be one of the most important contents to deepen the strategic partnership relations. Keywords: China Pakistan Energy Cooperation Citedy By: 2 Development of adaptive algorithms for the operation of windows, fans, and doors to predict thermal comfort and energy use in Pakistani buildings [PDF] http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/19401490701868448 Author: Hom B. Rijal, Paul Gerard Tuohy, Michael A. Humphreys Journal: American Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Transactions,Vol.114(2),2008--Pages555-573 Abstract: This investigation of the window-opening data from extensive field surveys in UK office buildings demonstrates: (1) how people control the indoor environment by opening windows; (2) the cooling potential of opening windows; and (3) the use of an adaptive algorithm for predicting window-opening behaviour for thermal simulation in ESP-r. It was found that when the window was open the mean indoor and outdoor temperatures were higher than when closed, but it was shown that nonetheless there was a useful cooling effect from opening a window. The adaptive algorithm for window-opening behaviour was then used in thermal simulation studies for some typical office designs. The thermal simulation results were in general agreement with the findings of the field surveys. The adaptive algorithm is shown to provide insights not available using non adaptive simulation methods and can assist in achieving more comfortable, lower energy buildings while avoiding overheating. Keywords: Adaptive algorithms, windows, fans, doors, thermal comfort, Enrgy use, Pakistani buildings Citedy By: 81 Hydro and wind power integration: A case study of dargai station in Pakistan [PDF] http://shoni2.princeton.edu/ftp/lyo/journals/EnergyPowerEngineering-2012.pdf Author: Shahbaz Awan, Muhammad Ali, Muhammad Asif, Amjad Ullah Journal: Energy and Power Engineering,Vol.4(4),2012--Pages203-209 Abstract: Pakistan is facing acute energy crises since last few years. Due to shortage of fuel oil and its sky touching prices, it seems very uneconomical to generate electricity from fuel oil. In order to generate cheap electricity we have to rely on renewable energy resources. To address these challenges, wind power generation is among the popular options in the world which is now being considered in Pakistan as well. However unremitting change in wind speed from calm to stormy introduces real challenges. Storing wind energy in batteries during the periods of low demand seems an expensive option, especially when dealing with large scale power generation. Due to incessantly varying nature of wind speed, it is not feasible to rely only on wind power for cheap power production. Also, it is not thriftily possible to construct separate transmission line. However if we integrate wind power with hydro power, we can utilize the maximum possible transmission capacity. Existing hydro power station operating in that area or pumped storage scheme can be used. This paper is an attempt to analyze coordination of wind generation with hydro power in those areas of Pakistan where both wind and hydro power sources exist. In this paper, different issues have been analyzed taking case study of Dargai. This paper is first attempt in Pakistan about integration of wind and hydro power to draw some general conclusions and to point out some areas in which further research can be done. Keywords: : wind power, hydro energy, dargai Pakistan Citedy By: 5 Building sector energy conservation programme of Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/037877889190021T Author: Gul NajamJamy Journal: Energy and Buildings,Vol.16(1-2),1991--Pages533-535 Abstract: The urban climate in Pakistan presents a picture of concern. Concrete buildings, metalled roads, and rapidly diminishing foliage are creating urban heat islands. This has led to an alarming rate of increase in energy consumption by buildings to remain comfortable. This paper highlights the extent and nature of Pakistan's Buildings Sector Energy Conservation Programme to cope with this situation. Both ongoing as well as planned activities have been outlined. Results expected from a successful implementation of the programme are also described. Keywords: Building sector, energy conservation programme, Pakistan Citedy By: 2 Groundwater uptake and sustainability of plantations in Southern Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378377498000304 Author: A.N.Khanzada, J.D.Morris, R.Ansari, P.G.Slavich Journal: Agricultural Water Management,Vol.36(2),1998--Pages121-139 Abstract: Farm woodlots or plantations of salt tolerant trees may provide an economic use or reclamation treatment for salt-affected farmland within the irrigation regions of the Indus Valley, but the hydrological impact and sustainability of such plantations are unknown. Detailed measurements of plantation water use, watertable depth and soil conditions were recorded over 2 years in two small plantations with contrasting soil and groundwater salinity at Tando Jam in the Sindh province of Pakistan. The species monitored were Acacia nilotica, A. ampliceps and Prosopis pallida. Annual water use by 3- to 5-year old A. nilotica was 1248 mm on the severely saline site and 2225 mm on the mildly saline site. Water use by the other species was less than 25% of these rates, but this difference is largely explained by their lower density in terms of sapwood area per hectare. Water use by A. nilotica was considerably greater than annual rainfall, implying uptake of groundwater which was confirmed both by piezometric observations and chloride balance modelling to predict vertical water movement through the root zone. Plantation watertables fell from 1.7 m below surface in March to over 2.9 m in September, then rose again during irrigation of the surrounding farmland. Root zone salt concentrations remained high at the more saline site throughout the monitoring period, but at the less saline site there was evidence of increasing root zone salinity as salt accumulated in areas of the profile subject to root water uptake. Salt concentration in the upper profile decreased as the soil dried and water was absorbed from greater depth. Plantations using saline groundwater may be sustainable if occasional leaching and other salt-removing processes are sufficient to maintain root zone salinity at a level which does not excessively reduce tree growth. Keywords: Water use, Salinity, Watertable, Chloride balance model, Acacia, Prosopis, energy conservation Pakistan Citedy By: 50 IP and TAPI in the New Great Game: Can Pakistan keep its hopes high [PDF] http://www.irs.org.pk/spapril12.pdf Author: SEHER ABBAS Journal: Spotlight on Regional Affairs,Vol.xxxi(4),2012--Pages1-38 Abstract: Like most of the 30 years that preceded it, 2012 will be punctuated by statistical evidence of Asias growing weight in the world economy and by the West's relative decline, declares the Economist.(1) The world is now moving to a new polycentric world order. This evolving world order is evident by the struggle for energy-fields that extend from Iran to the Pacific Ocean. It is there, as Pepe Escobar terms it the Liquid War for the control of Eurasia takes place. Nothing in Eurasia is without an energy angle and it has all come down to the struggle for blue gold and black gold. OPECs monopolistic system of devising oil prices and the political/security instability in the Middle East has caused the world powers to look elsewhere to solve their energy needs. Furthermore, due to the economic rise of China and India, and their subsequent rising thirst for oil and gas to run their growing industries, the global politics of energy is messier than ever. Keywords: Energy, Pakistan, global politics Citedy By: 6 Current status and overview of renewable energy potential in Pakistan for continuous energy sustainability [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032116002550 Author: Abdul Ghafoor, Tanzeel ur Rehman, Anjum Munir, Manzoor Ahmad Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.60(),2016--Pages1332-1342 Abstract: Unfortunately, Pakistan is facing severe energy crises from the last decade due to increasing population and heavily dependence on the import of the fossil fuels. The electricity breakdown/blackouts was 1418 h in rural areas and 810 h in urban areas. This situation has drastically affected the residential, industrial and commercial sector of the country. Currently, it is a big challenge for the government to sustain the future energy supply of the country. Under these circumstances, the research have been increased for the exploration of renewable energy sources in the country to fulfill the deficit scenario of the country. Fortunately, Pakistan is lying in such a geographical location where potential for all the renewable energy sources exists abundantly viz. solar, wind, biogas production, bio-energy from biomass and feedstock, mini and micro hydel. About 81 million ton/annum biomass production has a huge potential to produce enough bio-energy by employing different technologies viz. combustion, gasification, pyrolysis, trans-esterification process etc. Similarly, available dung from 72 million animals (cows and buffalos) and available poultry droppings from 785 million poultry birds can produce considerable biogas to produce heat and electricity. Pakistan is also blessed with 5.5 Wh m2 d1 solar insolation with annual mean sunshine duration of 810 h d1 throughout the country. Wind speed 57 m s1 persists in the coastal regions of Sindh and Baluchistan provinces with more than 20,000 MW of economically feasible wind power potential. The worldwide utilization of renewable energy is already on a fast track, however, Pakistan is still lacking in adaptation of these blessed technologies. Therefore, it is a high time that the government should launch a comprehensive program for R&D, commercialization and awareness of the community by incentivizing for the wide scale adaption of renewable energy technologies for the sustainable energy supply of the country in future. Keywords: Fossil fuels, Solar energy, Wind energy, Biogas, Biomass, Biofuels, Pakistan, energy sustainability Citedy By: 1 Derivates of energy consumption and energy strength in Pakistan: An application of complete decomposition model [PDF] https://www.medwelljournals.com/abstract/?doi=rjasci.2007.484.488 Author: Syed Adnan Haider Ali Shah Bukhari and Liaqat Ali Journal: Research Journal of Applied Sciences,Vol.2(4),2007--Pages484-488 Abstract: In present study complete decomposition model employed to decompose the changes in energy consumption and energy strength in Pakistan during 1960 to 1998. A general decomposition model raises a problem due to residual term. In some models the residual term is omitted that cause a large estimation error, while in some models the residual term is regarded as an interaction that might create a puzzle for the analysis. A complete decomposition model used here to solve this problem. Keywords: Energy consumption, energy strength, decomposition model Pakistan Citedy By: 2 Impact of different public E&P policies on natural gas reserves and production in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301420712000487 Author: Faisal Jamil Journal: Resources Policy,Vol.37(3),2012--Pages368-374 Abstract: Low wellhead domestic gas prices over the past few years have led to the beginning of a shortage in natural gas reserves and production in Pakistan. Gas demand steadily rises in all sectors for being an economical fuel as compare to substitutes. In the view of foregoing consumption trend, the demand for gas is expected to grow with a higher pace during the 2010s. On the contrary, indigenous gas reserves are running out and cannot keep up with the demand. This paper examines the extent of upstream activities in different petroleum policy regimes. The wellhead price for indigenous gas is compared with the prices of alternatives (for example, gas import prices). In order to put the problem in perspective, the relationship between wellhead gas price and cumulative gas reserves in Pakistan are analyzed and we find that the looming gas shortage can be ameliorated in the short-run and eliminated in the long-run through incentivized wellhead price. To put it briefly, the idea is mooted to first take advantage of huge domestic reserves to ensure competitive consumer prices for gas. The findings are applicable to several other economies with under-developed natural resources Keywords: Petroleum policy, Wellhead gas price, Pakistan,Gas imports, gas demands, gas rserves Citedy By: 5 Pakistan: Household Use of Commercial Energy [PDF] http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/336261468059088633/Pakistan-Household-use-of-commercial-energy Author: Masami Kojima Journal: World bank Report,Vol.1(),2006--Pages Abstract: This study aimed to examine the impact of changing availability of different energy sources and their price levels on household energy choice, consumption, and expenditures. Knowledge of household expenditures and energy consumption patterns is an essential building block for further work on possible policies in the energy sector and associated poverty and social impact analysis. To this end, the four most recent household expenditure surveys-conducted in 1994, 1997, 1999, and 2001-were analyzed in detail. The survey periods included those with low fuel prices (1999) and a time of rising world oil prices (2001). No household expenditure surveys are available from the last two years, when the increase in fuel prices has far outstripped general inflation. Nevertheless, between 1994 and 2001, prices of electricity, natural gas, kerosene, and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) rose more rapidly than the consumer price index (CPI), potentially offering insights into how households might react to, and manage, sharply rising energy prices. The household survey analysis was supplemented by focus group discussions and individual interviews conducted in 2004 and 2005. Participants were asked questions about reasons for energy choice, the quality of service provided, evidence of increasing competition, affordability of different energy sources, benefits and costs, and commercial malpractice. Keywords: Household Use of Commercial Energy, fuel prices, energy costs Citedy By: 2 Solar resource assessment study for Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032115016810 Author: Steffen Stkler, Christoph Schillings, Birk Kraasb Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.58(),--Pages1184-118 Abstract: Solar resource assessment becomes a very important factor for planners of Photovoltaic (PV) and Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) systems. Choice between nearby locations can make a difference if a plant is profitable or not, especially in a climatic region with complex topography as can be found in Pakistan. Nevertheless, Pakistans geographic location and climate offers a very high potential for solar energy applications. The solar resource assessment study presented in this article describes the approach and set-up required by the World Banks Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP).1 The project aims to create a validated solar atlas for Pakistan based on a combination of satellite data and ground measurements to support country-driven efforts to improve renewable energy resource awareness and exploitation. There are several country-specific, ESMAP-funded projects conducted by the World Bank Group (WBG) that cover comprehensive mapping and geospatial planning, including ground-based data collection. The solar resource estimation of Pakistan was one of the first projects to be approved within the program.The final and validated dataset ultimately will be published in the International Renewable Energy Agencies (IRENA) global atlas for renewable energy. Keywords: Solar, Irradiance, Pakistan, ESMAP, World Bank Citedy By: 7 Distribution of diffuse and direct insolation over Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0741983X9090097L Author: I.R.Raja, J.W.Twidell Journal: Solar & wind technology,Vol.7(2-3),1990--Pages277-292 Abstract: With the exception of a three year record of diffuse insolation over Quetta, diffuse and direct insolation is not recorded at any location in Pakistan. The empirical relation due to Mani and Chacko (Solar Energy14, 139, 1973) for diffuse insolation has therefore been applied to estimate diffuse insolation over 37 locations in Pakistan and three neighbouring stations. Direct insolation is also obtained for the same locations. Using the data for 40 locations, diffuse and direct insolation is presented on maps. The isolines are compared with the results obtained for India and world maps. Keywords: Diffuse insolation, direct insolation, Quetta, Pakistan Citedy By: 4 Socio-economic prospects of solar technology utilization in Abbottabad, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032114006005 Author: Musarrat Jabeen, Muhammad Umar, Muhammad Zahid & Masood Ur Rehaman Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.39(),2014--Pages1164-1172 Abstract: Social evaluation is placed at low levels of the technical architecture, for this reason the findings of this study would be useful. This study evaluates the socio-economic prospects of solar technology utilization (STU) in Abbottabad, Pakistan. The objective of the study is to underline the variables of existing and inclined trends for alternate technology that come into consideration to assess the potential for STU by the consumers. The study finds out the type of need of the consumers have that solar technology could address to enhance the quality of life. On the bases of income, comparative user friendliness and comparative cost analysis, the study suggests the STU is the best market competitive technologies available. The potential for STU exists at 65% as frequency distribution of the survey showed. This study is a contribution to practical knowledge of solar technology to mitigate the energy crisis in Pakistan. Keywords: Solar technology utilization, Socio-economic prospects, Existing trends, Abbottabad, Pakistan Citedy By: 4 Scenario analysis of strategies to control air pollution in Pakistan [PDF] https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236162127_Scenario_analysis_of_strategies_to_control_air_pollution_in_Pakistan Author: Pallav Purohit, Tahira Munir, Peter Rafaj Journal: Journal of Integrative Environmental Scences,Vol.10(2),2013--Pages Abstract: This study presents an initial analysis of potential implications of the current economic development plans of Pakistan on local and regional air pollution and explores alternative approaches that could limit the envisaged deterioration of air quality. The study summarizes exogenous projections of energy use and application of emission control measures for sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and particulate matter up to 2030 and discusses the resulting implications on air quality. Illustrative emission control scenarios are used to assess health benefits of additional measures and associated costs. Scenarios investigate the policy options of employing cleaner fuels and of applying end-of-pipe emission control measures. Keywords: Energy use, cleaner fuels, air quality air pollution, economic development, Pakistan Citedy By: 6 Prospects for coal gasification in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0360544286900472 Author: Ahmad Mumtaz, Arshad M.Khan Journal: Energy,Vol.11(11-12),1986--Pages1103-1111 Abstract: Pakistan is currently facing serious energy supply problems. Energy demand has been increasing by about 8% per year during the last 12yr and this trend is likely to continue. Since 19801981 the oil import bill has been consuming more than 50% of yearly export earning. As there is not much scope for a sizeable increase in the domestic supply of gas, oil, or hydroelectric power, increasing the use of domestic coal is necessary to avoid excessive dependence on imported energy. Coal gasification to produce substitute natural gas (SNG) is not economical at present coal production costs, due to the low cost of indigenous gas and subsidized furnace oil and kerosene and the high SNG production costs from the technology available at present. If domestic prices of gas and liquid fuels are increased to the level of current international oil prices and developments in coal gasification technologies can bring about expected reductions in capital costs and improvements in efficiency, coal gasification may become economical in Pakistan. It is estimated that indigenous coal resources can potentially supply 36 million TCE/yr of SNG by 2000about 1020% of the substitutable fossil fuels demand for that yearalong with meeting about 9% of the electricity demand. Keywords: Coal gasification, Pakistan, energy supply problems, Energy demand, coal production costs Citedy By: 4 Thermal Hydraulic and Safety Analyses for Pakistan Research Reactor- [PDF] http://www.iaea.org/inis/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/35/015/35015936.pdf Author: I. H. BOKHARI, M. ISRAR, S. PERVEZ Journal: PReduced Enrichment for Research and Test Reactors (RERTR),Vol.(),1999--Pages Abstract: Thermal hydraulic and safety analysis of Pakistan Research Reactor-1 (PARR-1) utilizing lowenriched uranium (LEU) fuel have been performed using computer code PARET. The present corecomprises of 29 standard and 5 control fuel elements. Results of the thermal hydraulic analysis show thatthe core can be operated at a steady-state power level of 10 MW for a flow rate of 950 m3/h, withsufficient safety margins against ONB (onset of nucleate boiling) and DNB (departure from nucleateboiling). Safety analysis has been carried out for various modes of reactivity insertions. The eventsstudied include: start-up accident;accidental drop of a fuel element in the core; flooding of a beam tubewith water; removal of an in-pile experimentduring reactor operation etc. For each of these transients,time histories of reactor power, energy released and cladsurface temperature etc. were calculated. Theresults indicate that the peak clad temperatures remain well below the clad melting temperature duringthese accidents. It is therefore concluded that the reactor can be safely operated at 10 MW without compromising safety. Keywords: Thermal Energy, Hydralic Energy, Pakistan, Safety Analyses, Research Reactor Cited by 13 Citedy By: 13 Design and cost-benefit analysis of a novel anaerobic industrial bioenergy plant in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148116300088 Author: Rizwan Rasheed, Naghman Khan, Abdullah Yasar, Yuehong Su, Amtul BariTabinda Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.90(),2016--Pages242-247 Abstract: The design and Cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of a novel anaerobic bioenergy plant is presented. This plant can digest various feed sources including animal-manure, vegetable-fruit wastes, poultry wastes, sugar molasses etc. The fixed dome multi-digestor system enables a continuous feed and flow mechanism. It is also equipped with a biogas purification, compression and storage system. This medium scale bioenergy plant is the first of its kind in Pakistan. It has a total installation cost of US$105,000 and annual operation and maintenance cost of US$23,400. The average energy production is 142,380 kWh per annum. With a current average energy cost of US$0.315 per kWh from all sources in Pakistan, the cost-benefit ratio is 1.2 at an internal rate of return (IRR) of 19.76%, and short payback period. Keywords: Biogas, Bio-fuels, Bioenergy generation, cost-benefit analysis, anaerobic bioenergy plant, Pakistan Citedy By: 5 Economic development, pollutant emissions and energy consumption in Malaysia [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0161893807000580 Author: James B.Ang Journal: Journal of Policy Modeling,Vol.30(2),2008--Pages271-278 Abstract: The objective of this paper is to examine the long-run relationship between output, pollutant emissions, and energy consumption in Malaysia during the period 19711999. To supplement the findings of cointegrating analysis, we assess the causal relationships between the variables using the recent causality tests available in the literature. The results indicate that pollution and energy use are positively related to output in the long-run. We found a strong support for causality running from economic growth to energy consumption growth, both in the short-run and long-run. Keywords: Energy consumption, Pollutant emissions, Causality, Multivariate cointegration Citedy By: 504 Retrospect and Prospects of Edible Oil and Bio-Diesel in Pakistan--A Review [PDF] http://www.pjar.org.pk/Issues/Vol23_2010No3_4/Vol23_2010No3_4P177.pdf Author: Sumia Bint Zaman, Sidra Majeed and Shahid Ahmad Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Research,Vol.23(3-4),2010--Pages177-192 Abstract: Globally resources of petro-fuels are diminishing at a rapid rate.Efforts are underway to develop sources of bio-fuels. Out of the known sources ofbio-fuels, Jatropha is one of the most promising option. The purpose of this studywas to evaluate primarily the regional and global experiences to assess the potentialof Jatropha farming in Pakistan and to conduct a comparative economic analysisof alternate feasible options e.g. production of oilseeds, which are also beingimported in large quantities. Temporal analysis (1950-09) for edible oil consumption,production and imports is made. Projections for edible oil are worked outup to 2030. As there have been large variations in yield of Jatropha reported byvarious studies conducted in India and other countries, therefore most reliabledata have been selected for analysis to assess the prospects in Pakistan. Comparativeeconomic analysis is made in terms of oil contents, number of crops per year,yield and gross returns of oilseed crops and Jatropha. Analysis shows that increasein production of edible oil over the time is negligible against the largeincrease in requirement resulted in higher production gapbeingfilled throughimports. Projections made for edible oils illustrated that production gap is goingto be wider, which is currently 1.86 million tonnes (mt) and projected to be 3.4 mtby 2030. Jatropha seed production analysis of water-yield functions revealed thatyield varies from 1.1 t ha-1 in drought or dry spells to 12.75 t ha-1 with full irrigation in favorable environments. Benefit-cost analysis shows that break-even pointcan be achieved in fourth year of plantation of Jatropha. The projected consumptionin Pakistan for petro-fuel for 2025 is 35.1 mt, which is almostdouble of thecurrent consumption. Thus, the target projections for replacement of petro-fuelwith bio-diesel will be 3.51 mt for which 3.5 mha of land is required, as Jatrophahas to be grown in marginal areas with marginal yields. Comparativeeconomicanalysis shows that for sunflower and canola all conditions are favorable, as perfrequency of crops, price and returns as oilseed get returns of 166% higher thanJatropha. Oil contents ofsunflowerandcanolaarehigher than Jatropha. Analysisconcludes that it is more feasible to grow oilseeds because in trade-off betweenfood and fuel, food should win. Before launching commercial production ofJatropha in Pakistan key issues need to be addressed including maintaining thegoal of food security, water scarcity, cost-effectivity, and feasibility of Jatrophain comparison with oilseeds, pulses, feed crops and fuel-wood plants. Keywords: Jatropha; Edible Oil; Biodiesel; Farming Potential; Pakistan. Citedy By: 5 Fuel cell technology for sustainable development in PakistanAn over-view [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032115009120 Author: Rizwan Raza, Nadeem Akram, Muhammad Sufyan Javed, Asia Rafique, Kaleem Ullah Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.53(),2016--Pages450-461 Abstract: Fuel cell technology holds the combination of benefits, which are barely offered by any other energy generating technology. Because the fuel used in this technology is found in abundance in nature and can also be renewed/sustained. Pakistan is blessed with renewable energy resources which are suitable for fuel cell technology. Therefore, fuel cell technology offers a great opportunity to meet the demand of energy and for the sustainable development of Pakistan. The energy research group at COMSATS Institute of Information Technology (CIIT), Lahore has made efforts to study the technical aspects of fuel cell technology and its commercial benefits. The research group is interested in finding ways and means of generating and storing the energy produced by using fuel cells. In this paper, the research activities on fuel cell technology in Pakistan have been reviewed and it is also discussed how this technology can resolve the current energy crises in Pakistan and can be the source of sustainable energy. It has been also reviewed that the country would greatly benefit from fuel cells and fuel cell hybrid system (environmental friendly technology), which could be the best solution for electricity production as well for automobile industry. Keywords: Renewable energy, Sustainable development, Hydrogen fuels, Fuel cells, Electrodes, Pakistan Citedy By: 7 High frequency micro earthquakes recorded at Quetta, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.bssaonline.org/content/54/6B/2133.abstract Author: JOHN DENOYER Journal: Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America,Vol.54(),1964--Pages2133-2139 Abstract: Numerous high frequency microearthquakes were recorded on a special portable magnetic tape recorder at Quetta, Pakistan, during the summer of 1962. These microearthquakes have maximum particle velocities between 30 and 50 cps. Many of the foci appear to be almost directly under the recording station. The focal distance for the nearest of these earthquakes appears to be less than one km. The source for these earthquakes may result from bedding plane slippage as strain accumulates in sediments adjacent to a high angle fault. Keywords: Earthquakes, Quetta, Pakistan, Seismology Citedy By: 6 Risk Analysis for Construction and Operation of Gas Pipeline Projects in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.uet.edu.pk/research/researchinfo/journal/volume2/4.pdf Author: S. Mubin and G. Mubin Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.2(),2008--Pages Abstract: In order to cater for its high energy demand, Pakistan is planning to import natural gas through pipelines from neighboring countries. For fully utilizing the imported gas, providing it to end customers, the infrastructure of gas pipeline needs to be developed. Therefore, huge investment has been done and proposed in this sector in coming future. Considering geological, topographical, geopolitical and climatic conditions of the country, there is added risk of earthquake, landslides and floods. Due to current geopolitical situation there is a persistent threat of unrest and terrorism in the country. Instable Government policies, high rate of inflation, rapid change in material prices are also important risk factors. All these factors make the situation very complex in quantifying the risk especially for a project in which the risk impact factor rises exponentially in case of risk occurrence. In this paper, most appropriate risk classification is made based on technological, organizational, political, natural climatic, security and environmental risk factors. Effort has been made to device a simpler risk management methodology to analyze and manage risks of gas pipeline project. In the proposed risk management model Monte Carlo simulation has been used to identify critical risks. Keywords: Oil and Gas pipelines; Risk Analysis and Management; Monte Carlo simulation Citedy By: 10 Suitability of multistage enthalpy extraction technology for power plants in Pakistan [PDF] http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1179/174602207X239999 Author: A. Malik, S. Naveed & Z. Nawaz Journal: Journal of the Energy Institute,Vol.80(3),2007--Pages Abstract: Multistage enthalpy extraction technology (MEET) provides an improvement in integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) technology and offersa n attractive alternative of conventional pulverised coal and natural gas power generation. It certainly improves efficiency and allows better emission compliance. Although the operating cost of IGCC is low, high capital costs threaten its competitiveness. Improvements in turbine design and gas clean-up system have been the focus of studies to make it economical. The competitive nature of power generation industry has so far threatened IGCC technology. For a country such as Pakistan where generation of electrical energy is of major concern, all options including effective coal utilisation need to be pursued. The option of employing MEET is worth considering, which offers considerable process improvement and allows the utilisation of a variety of coals. Multistage enthalpy extraction technology (MEET) technology is briefly discussed here along with its suitability for the Pakistani energy situation. Keywords: Enthalpy extraction technology, power plants, Pakistan Citedy By: 3 Assessment of Power Generation Potential from Municipal Solid Wastes: A Case Study of Hyderabad City [PDF] http://www.ceacsu.edu.pk/PDF%20file/Volume%2015%20No%201/18-27-PJAEC-22042014-07.pdf Author: Muhammad Safar Korai, Rasool Bux Mahar and Muhammad Aslam Uqaili Journal: Pak. J. Anal. Environ. Chem,Vol.15(1),2014--Pages18-27 Abstract: This paper is an attempt to estimate the power generation potential through utilization of municipal solid waste (MSW) in order to overcome energy crisis, faced by country now a days. The waste-to-energy has proven itself to be an environment friendly solution for the disposal of municipal solid waste. Representative samples of the MSW were collected from the open dumping sites of solid wastes and analyzed for calorific value by using a Bomb Calorimeter in the laboratory. Net and gross calorific value of mixed MSW were obtained as 6519 & 6749 kcal/kg, respectively. Based upon its calorific value, net power generation was estimated as 1512 kWh per ton of MSW generated. This shows that MSW generated in the study area is more suitable for thermal treatment process. In this regard, different thermal treatment technologies have been compared with respect to various parameters and mass burn incinerator is found suitable for generation of power. This technology for conversion of MSW into power generation would not only be beneficial to meet the power demand but also reduce the environmental pollution to certain extent. Keywords: Power Generation Potential, Municipal Solid Wastes, Hyderabad, Pakistan Citedy By: 5 Forecasting electricity consumption in Pakistan: the way forward [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421515302068 Author: Anwar Hussain, Muhammad Rahman & Junaid Alam Memona Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.90(),2016--Pages73-80 Abstract: Growing shortfall of electricity in Pakistan affects almost all sectors of its economy. For proper policy formulation, it is imperative to have reliable forecasts of electricity consumption. This paper applies Holt-Winter and Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) models on time series secondary data from 1980 to 2011 to forecast total and component wise electricity consumption in Pakistan. Results reveal that Holt-Winter is the appropriate model for forecasting electricity consumption in Pakistan. It also suggests that electricity consumption would continue to increase throughout the projected period and widen the consumption-production gap in case of failure to respond the issue appropriately. It further reveals that demand would be highest in the household sector as compared to all other sectors and the increase in the energy generation would be less than the increase in total electricity consumption throughout the projected period. The study discuss various options to reduce the demand-supply gap and provide reliable electricity to different sectors of the economy. Keywords: Projections, Energy, Forecasting model, Forecast evaluation, Sectorial energy consumption Citedy By: 4 Radon concentrations in coal mines of Baluchistan, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0265931X9900065X Author: Aziz ahmed Qureshi, Din Muhammad Kakar, Muhammad Akram, N.U Khattak Journal: Journal of Environmental Radioactivity,Vol.48(2),2000--Pages203-209 Abstract: Prolonged exposure to radon, the largest source (69%) of natural radioactivity, may cause lung cancer and bronchial tissue damage. So monitoring of radon at places of high radioactivity and in underground mines is important to assess the radiological hazards to occupational workers. For these reasons radon measurements were carried out in some coal mines of Baluchistan, Pakistan. The measurements were based upon passive detection of radon using CN-85 track detectors in Box Type Dosimeters. The radon concentration varied from 121 to 408 Bq m3 in the mines under study. The computed radon dose varied from 1.38 to 4.67 mSv yr1 with an average of 2.190.5 mSv yr1. These coal mines have been found to be safe from radon-related health hazards. Keywords: Radioactivity, Radon, Track etching, Dosimetry, Health hazards, Radiation protection Citedy By: 45 Measurement of radon exhalation rate and soil gas radon concentration in areas of southern Punjab, Pakistan [PDF] https://academic.oup.com/rpd/article-abstract/140/3/300/1623915/Measurement-of-radon-exhalation-rate-and-soil-gas?redirectedFrom=fulltext Author: S. A. Mujahid, S. Hussain, M. Ramzan Journal: Radiation Protection Dosimetry,Vol.140(3),2010--Pages300-303 Abstract: Plastic track detectors were used to measure the radon concentration and exhalation rate from the soil samples. The samples were collected from areas of southern Punjab, Pakistan. In a laboratory experiment, passive alpha dosemeters were installed inside cylindrical bottles containing the soil samples. The radon concentrations and the radon exhalation rate were found in the ranges of 34 7 to 260 42 Bq m3 and 38 8 to 288 46 mBq m2 h1, respectively. The on-site measurements of radon in the soil gas were also carried out in these areas using a scintillation alpha counter. The concentration of radon in the soil gas was found in the range of 423 823565 438 Bq m3. Keywords: radon exhalation rate, soil gas radon, southern Punjab, Pakistan Citedy By: 9 Shale Gas Potential of Lower Cretaceous Sembar Formation in Middle and Lower Indus Sub-Basins, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.searchanddiscovery.com/documents/2012/10392ahmad/ndx_ahmad.pdf Author: Nazir Ahmad, Javed Mateen, Kashif Shehzad, Nasar Mehmood, and Fahad Arif Journal: Annual Technical Conference 2011, Islamabad, Pakistan,Vol.(),2012--Pages Abstract: Natural gas production from tight shale formations, known as shale gas, has become an important source of natural gas in the world due to technological advances and rapid increases in natural gas prices as a result of significant supply and demand pressures. Pakistan is facing big challenges in meeting its ever growing energy needs due to an expanding population and economic growth. It is necessary to exploit unconventional energy resources along with conventional ones to meet the countrys energy requirements. Here we investigate shale gas potential of the Lower Cretaceous Sembar Formation within a large area of the Middle and Lower Indus Basin. The study includes the organic richness, hydrocarbon generative potential, shale thickness and distribution, subsurface depth of studied interval, maturity, volume of hydrocarbon generated and retained per section, and reservoir characteristics of the Sembar shales. Geochemical data show that the TOC of the formation ranges from 0.55 wt.% to 9.48 wt.% with present day generation potential of 0.14- 18.69 mg HC/g rock. The average TOC of immature samples is 1.0 wt.% with a generation potential of 2.88 mg HC/g rock and hydrogen index (HI) of 240 mg HC/g TOC (type III & II/III). Gross thickness of the formation ranges from less than 50 m to more than 1000 m with an average of 300 m in the study area. Subsurface depth (top of the formation) varies between 1000 to 5000 m in platform to foredeep areas. Overburden thickness, geothermal gradient, Tmax and Vitrinite Reflectance data place the formation in oil, wet and dry gas windows at the depths of 2500 m, 3200 m and 3400 m respectively. Based on original generation potential, and average source rock thickness, volume of generated hydrocarbon (gas equivalent) is 242 bcf/section. By taking expulsion (50% of the generated volume) into account and conversion of retained oil into gas through secondary cracking, the retained volume is 103 bcf/section. Average porosity of the formation at reservoir level (3400-4000 m) is 6.0%. Mineralogically, the formation is composed of an average of 42% quartz, 47% clay, 3% calcite and 1% pyrite. Depth for shale gas exploitation in platform areas is about 3500 m, whereas in foldbelt regions, it varies between 1000 to 3000 m. Keywords: marine gases, Indus Sub-Basins, Pakistan Citedy By: 5 Measurements of natural radioactivity and radon exhalation rates from different brands of cement used in Pakistan [PDF] https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5567502_Measurements_of_natural_radioactivity_and_radon_exhalation_rates_from_different_brands_of_cement_used_in_Pakistan Author: Shafiq Mujahid, A Rahim, Safeer Hussain, M Farooq Journal: Radiation Protection Dosimetry,Vol.130(2),2008--Pages206-212 Abstract: The measurement of activity due to the naturally occurring radionuclide has been carried out in different brands of cement available in Pakistan. The gamma spectra of the collected samples were obtained using high-purity germanium detector and analysed for the presence of 232Th, 238U and 40K. The assessment of radiological hazards due to these radionuclides has also been made. The studies concerning the determination of radon-exhalation rates from these samples of cement were also carried out using CR-39 based NRPB radon dosimeters. The range of activity concentrations were found for 226Ra (from 25.10 1.55 to 52.60 3.20 Bq kg1), 232Th (from 10.30 0.65 to 30.40 1.70 Bq kg1) and 40K (from 17.25 1.55 to 292.95 23.05 Bq kg1). The estimated value of radium equivalent concentration was from 11.16 2.60 to 114.98 7.11 Bq kg1. The calculated absorbed dose rate in air and the annual effective dose were in the range from 18.54 1.17 to 52.90 3.31 nGy h1 and 0.09 0.01 to 0.26 0.02 mSv, respectively. The external and internal hazard indices were in the range from 0.11 0.01 to 0.31 0.02 and 0.18 0.01 to 0.45 0.03, respectively. The radon exhalation rates from different brands of cement were found in the range from 3.3 0.7 to 8.1 1.7 mBq kg1 h1. Keywords: radionuclide, gamma spectra, dosimeters, radon exhalation Citedy By: 21 Morphologic Studies of Fusulinids from Lower Permian of West Pakistan [PDF] https://pubs.usgs.gov/pp/0643g/report.pdf Author: RC Douglass Journal: AAPG Bulletin,Vol.52(3),1968--Pages525-526 Abstract: The "Lower Productus Limestone" of West Pakistan yields an abundant and well-preserved fauna of fusulinid Foraminifera. The fusulinids are found in the lower part of the Amb Formation of the Zaluch Group of Early Permian age described by Teichert in 1966. About 50 samples of the fusulinids, collected by C. Teichert in 1961-62 and R. E. Grant in 1964-65, contain the genus Monodiexodina. Each sample of fusulinids is relatively homogeneous in morphologic characters, having a fairly normal distribution of values through a limited range for most characters. There are large differences between many of the samples with little or no overlap in the dimensions of some characters at specified volutions. Distinct species could be described by conventional methods based on a few speci ens or even on reasonably large samples, and statistically meaningful differences could be demonstrated. Cutbill and Forbes' 1967 discussion on the significance of the prolocular diameter and its effect on comparisons by volution has led to a re-evaluation of the data on these samples. Comparison of measurements at equal radii instead of by volution brings out many similarities between samples. For example, two samples that are quite distinct when compared by volution cannot be distinguished at equal radii Keywords: Lower Productus Limestone, fusulinid Foraminifera, morphologic characters Citedy By: 4 Computation of monthly average hourly and daily solar radiation incident on a flat tilted surface at Karachi, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0741983X86900147 Author: Firoz Ahmad, S.A. Husain Journal: Solar & Wind Technology,Vol.3(4),1986--Pages329-333 Abstract: Monthly average of hourly and daily solar radiation incident upon a tilted, south-facing surface has been computed from the available solar radiation data for twenty-five years (19581983) for Karachi. The hourly and daily values of solar radiation on tilted surface are then compared. The difference between the results obtained is noted to be very small. Annual and monthly averages of solar radiation are also evaluated from hourly values besides averages for the heating and cooling seasons. Keywords: daily solar radiation, Karachi, Pakistan Citedy By: 3 Computation of monthly average hourly and daily solar radiation incident on a flat tilted surface at Karachi, Pakistan [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0741983X86900147 Author: Firoz Ahmad, S.A. Husain Journal: Solar & Wind Technology,Vol.3(4),1986--Pages329-333 Abstract: Monthly average of hourly and daily solar radiation incident upon a tilted, south-facing surface has been computed from the available solar radiation data for twenty-five years (19581983) for Karachi. The hourly and daily values of solar radiation on tilted surface are then compared. The difference between the results obtained is noted to be very small. Annual and monthly averages of solar radiation are also evaluated from hourly values besides averages for the heating and cooling seasons. Keywords: daily solar radiation, Karachi, Pakistan Citedy By: 3 Analysis of the assessment factors for renewable energy dissemination program evaluation using fuzzy AHP [PDF] http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032110000286 Author: Eunnyeong Heo, Jinsoo Kim, Kyung Jin Boo Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.14(8),2010--Pages2214-2220 Abstract: By 2030, Korean government aims to increase the share of new and renewable energy sources to 11% in the overall primary energy mix, that is, approximately 33 million TOE. However, carefully designed program is needed given the current low level of the share (2.37%, approximately 5.6 million TOE, as of 2007). Therefore, alongside R&D on new and renewable energy technology, establishing an effective dissemination program is also essential. This would require a decision-making base, for which this study established the criteria and factors and assessed the importance of each factor using the fuzzy analytical hierarchy process (AHP) method. Five criteria technological, market-related, economic, environmental, and policy-related and a total of seventeen factors were established. From the weights estimation results, we derived four major conclusions regarding the importance of economic feasibility, the advancement of the target technology in the global market, the disagreement between the policy maker and the specialist group, and the application of the results. Keywords: Renewable energyCriteriaFactorsDissemination programFuzzy AHP Citedy By: 122 Potential of on-Shore Wind Power in the Coastal Areas of Balochistan, Pakistan [PDF] http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1260/0309-524X.34.2.167 Author: Khanji Harijan, Mohammad A. Uqaili, Mujeebuddin Memon Journal: Wind Engineering,Vol.34(2),2010--Pages Abstract: Balochistan province has about 800 km long coastline whose continental shelf extends to a distance of 1540 km. Pakistan Meteorological Department has recorded wind speed for two years at 22 on-shore locations at 10 m and 30 m heights and estimated at 50 m height using power law. The wind duration availability in terms of numbers of hours the wind remained in a particular bin was also calculated by constructing the wind rose diagrams. The mean value of two years has been estimated and used in this study for the construction of wind duration curves for 20 selected locations. Using wind duration curves and Nordex N43/600 wind turbine as reference turbine, theoretical wind power potential at these locations has been estimated. The geographical potential has been estimated considering population density and excluding low wind areas. Finally, the technical potential has been estimated. The theoretical potential at most of the sites is in the range of 10001400 full load hours per year. The suitable area for wind turbine installation has been estimated as 7,700 km2. The annual technical potential of centralized grid connected wind power in the coastal area of Balochistan has been estimated as 42.5 TWh, which is about half of the current gross electricity generation in Pakistan. Keywords: Shore Wind Power, coastal wind, Balochistan, Pakistan, wind turbine Citedy By: 3 Feasible Wind Power Potential from Costal Line of Sindh Pakistan [PDF] http://www.airitilibrary.com/Publication/alDetailedMesh?docid=20407467-201406-201507080016-201507080016-393-400 Author: Mazhar Hussain Baloch, Ghulam Sarwar Kaloi, Jie Wang Journal: Research Journal of Applied ,Vol.(),--Pages393 - 400 Abstract: The energy is the serious issue, directly or indirectly, in the whole practice of advancement, development and existence of all the existing creatures. It plays a very important part in socioeconomic growth and social prosperity of any country, at least 1/3rd of the country has no access of energy like electricity. Globally Pakistan is an electricity lacking country, however deficient in oil and gas. Pakistan is rich in sources like water, coal, wind and solar energy. Electricity is the basic needs of all humans comfort and in addition to overcome power crises in common, Pakistan desires in the way to utilize its natural power assets similar to hydel power plant, sunlight and wind potential for the generation of electricity. Pakistan has surely considerable latent for exploiting wind energy. Additionally about 1000 km lengthy shoreline in southern and northern hilly areas offers an outstanding reserve of wind potential. The efforts need for utilization of wind energy in the country. This study includes only twenty selected regions of southern regions of Sindh province for power generation from a natural source of wind energy. Keywords: coastal wind, Sindh, Pakistan, Renewabl Energy Citedy By: 4 Cost effective solar water heater for energy resource management in developing countries. [PDF] Author: Qureshi, M. A., Moghal, M. R., Hassan, K. M. and Qureshi, S. A. Journal: New Horizons: Journal of the Institution of Electrical \& Electronics Engineers Pakistan,Vol.44(1),2004--Pages114--120 Abstract: As solar water heater is not a new idea but our basic approach is to reduce cost of the heater, used for domestic purpose, so that utilization of solar energy can reach to a common man. Now-a-days every nation is facing energy crisis and most of the engineers and scientists have devoted themselves to overcome energy problems and to conserve energy by designing machinery which consumes less fuel for specific purposes. A solar water heater is a long-term investment that will save you money and energy for many years. Like other renewable energy systems, solar water heaters minimize the environmental effects of enjoying a comfortable, modern lifestyle. In addition, they provide insurance against energy price increases, help reduce our dependence on foreign oil, and are investments in everyone's future. Solar water heaters do not pollute. By investing in one, you will be avoiding carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, and the other air pollution and wastes created when your utility generates power or you burn fuel to heat your household water. When a solar water heater replaces an electric water heater, the electricity displaced over 20 years represents more than 50 tons of avoided carbon dioxide emissions alone. Carbon dioxide traps heat in the upper atmosphere. Keywords: solar water heater, energy resource management, developing countries. Cost effective Citedy By: The multi-fuel solution for power plants. [PDF] Author: Pathan, M. I., Shaikh, N. A. and Nawaz, Z. Journal: Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.23(1),2004--Pages99--106 Abstract: Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) Technology offers an attractive alternative of conventional pulverized coal and natural gas power generation in terms of cycle efficiency \& emission compliance. But while operating cost is low, the high capital cost of IGCC has threatened its competitiveness. The improvement in turbine, gas clean up and other design addresses the challenge of high capital cost. The competitive nature of power generation industry could threaten the IGCC Technology. For a developing country like Pakistan, it is obligatory that all energy options must be pursued vigorously including coal utilization, which is considered to be one of the major options for the future use. Keywords: fuel solution, power plants, natural gas power generation, conventional pulverized coal Citedy By: Photocurrent generation through plant microbial fuel cell by varying electrode materials [PDF] Author: Gilani, S. R., Yaseen, A., Zaidi, S. R. A., Zahra, M. and Mahmood, Z Journal: Journal of Chemical Society of Pakistan, ,Vol.38(1),2016--Pages17-27 Abstract: World is suffering from severe energy crisis and require an efficient renewable energy source. To meet global energy demands, the conservation of renewable energy sources is inevitable. Significant renewable energy can be produced from organic matter that is otherwise considered waste in the form of clean bioelectricity. A less mediator plant microbial fuel cell designed for comparative analysis, power density of two different electrodes; Nickel and Graphite and tested using different local salt marsh grass species Sporobolasarabicus and Cynodondactylon. Both electrodes generated the power density of 23 mW/m2 and 10.7 mW/m2 respectively without using feed solution. In other experiments using feed solution, the power output was also recorded during the period of two months. The maximum power density recorded as 120 mW/m2 and 58mW/m2 respectively from S. arabicus and C. dactylon species. Electrodes coupling with same or different electrode materials checked and current voltage relationship with power recorded before and after the application of plant nutrient solution from 1-8th weeks. Maximum current voltage relationship with power measured around 4-6th week for different electrodes and plant species. Graphite proved best electrode material as compared to Nickel for production of electricity. Two conditions existed in the single chamber configuration, one in which cathode was placed inside the soil near roots to consume oxygen and other was to improve power enhancement using plant nutrient solutions. Ohmic resistance and mass transfer losses could be decreased using membraneless configuration that in fact makes it cost effective because membrane is the primary cost of plant microbial fuel cell. The main reason for not using membrane is that the concentration of oxygen decreases very much in the depth of water or sediment which reduces the need for a membrane. Moreover, the soil or sediment might filter oxygen, acts as PEM and the redox potential of soil also decreases. Keywords: Comparative analysis, Cynodon dactylon, Graphite, Nickel, PMFC,Sporobolas arabicus Citedy By: Corrosion resistance synergistic performance of alkyd based triplex coating system impregnated with Fe, Zn, Cr and Ti based corrosion inhibitors. [PDF] Author: Bano, H., Mahmood, A. and Kazmi, S. A. Journal: Journal of Chemical Society of Pakistan,,Vol.38(1),2016--Pages43--55 Abstract: An alkyd polymer based triplex coating system embedded with Iron Oxide, Zinc Chromate and Titanium Dioxide inhibitors was studied to ascertain its corrosion resistance synergistic performance at various anthropogenic and metropolitan sites of Karachi coastal city while accelerated salt spray test was also carried out for reference. Coating performance was ascertained by visual morphological inspection, gloss measurements, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Energy-Dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis and by Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectroscopy. EDX results substantiated a general increment in oxygen/carbon ratio and revealed that chromium was conspicuously vanished in all exposed coating systems. Diminution trend in gloss value, ex-corporation of inhibitors on the coating surface plus depletion of morphological features witnessed through SEM micrographs and curtailment of ester linkage signals in FTIR spectrum, concluded that an insignificant protection offered by the alkyd triplex coating due to its permeability upon weathering which led to ex-capsulation of inhibitors under moist conditions. Appraisal of these results have furnished an average coating performance correlation of 704 hpy (hours of salt spray test equivalence per year exposure test) at marine test site and 614 hpy at industrial test site in terms of blistering while equivalence mean in terms of rusting were found 815 hpy and 622 hpy at marine and industrial test sites respectively. Keywords: Alkyd coatings, Corrosion inhibitors, Corrosion resistance, Galvanized steel Citedy By: Aerodynamic analysis of s series wind turbine airfoils by using x foil technique. [PDF] Author: Zaheer, M. A., Munir, M. A., Zahid, I., Osaid, H. M. and Rizwan, M. Journal: Technical Journal,,Vol.20(2),2015--Pages104--113 Abstract: In order to attain supreme energy from wind turbine economically, blade profile enactment must be acquired. For extracting extreme power from wind, it is necessary to develop rotor models of wind turbine which have high rotation rates and power coefficients. Maximum power can also be haul out by using suitable airfoils at root and tip sections of wind turbine blades. In this research four different S-series airfoils have been selected to study their behavior for maximum power extraction from wind. The wind conditions during the research were ascertained from the wind speeds over Kallar Kahar Pakistan. In order to study the wind turbine operation, the extremely important parameters are lift and drag forces. Therefore an endeavor to study lift force and drag force at various sections of wind turbine blade is shown in current research. In order to acquire the utmost power from wind turbine, highest value of sliding ratio is prerequisite. At various wind speeds, performance of several blade profiles was analyzed and for every wind speed, the appropriate blade profile is ascertained grounded on the utmost sliding ratio. For every airfoil, prime angle of attack is resolute at numerous wind speeds. Keywords: wind turbine, x foil technique, Kallar Kahar, Pakistan Citedy By: Design, installation and evaluation of solar drip irrigation system at mini dam command area. [PDF] Author: Mongat, A. S., AndAllah-Bakhsh, M. Arshad, Shakoor, A., And Abdul-Hameed and Umm-E-Kalsoom, L. Anjum and Shamim, F. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences,,Vol.52(),2015--Pages483--490 Abstract: For Agricultural development and strong economy of the country, three important factors Land, Energy and Water play an important role. It is necessary to replace the traditional sources of energy with solar power and conventional methods of irrigation with High Efficiency Irrigation Systems (HEIS) to achieve the challenges of agriculture in future. A study was conducted with the objective to install and evaluate the solar operated drip irrigation system in arid zone of Punjab, Pakistan. The performance, efficiency and distribution uniformity of the system was evaluated. An economic analysis was also made to compare the solar operated with the diesel engine operated drip irrigation system. The range of average discharge values of drip was between 0. 0083-0. 00856m3 /hr (8. 3-8. 56lph) at different pressures. For 0. 0083m3 /hr discharge, the emission uniformity was between 85-90 \% , application uniformity was 98-99 \% and distribution uniformity was 99 \% at different pressures (kPa). It was found that solar power unit was more efficient, energy saving and economical. The operational cost of the unit was also very low as compared to diesel system while the initial installation cost of solar operational system was high Keywords: Agricultural development, economy, drip irrigation, diesel engine, solar power, energy saving Citedy By: A green learning model for teaching requirements engineering course. [PDF] Author: Memon, R. N., Memon, I. and Siyal, F. Journal: Bahria University Journal of Information & Communication Technologies,Vol.8(1),2015--Pages52--57 Abstract: Nowadays, severe environmental issues are faced by our planet mainly because of increase in consumption of energy, and waste from industry. Keywords: Citedy By: Passive control of mixing by flow pulsation in a curved pipe. [PDF] Author: Mangi, F. H., Mangi, K. H., Samo, S. R., Jatoi, A. R. and Siyal, Z. A. Journal: Quaid-e-Awam University Research Journal of Engineering, Science and Technology,,Vol.14(1),2015--Pages25--32 Abstract: Mixing enhancement usually referred to the reduction of non-homogeneities. Mixing operations are encountered widely throughout industrial processes in different energy systems and chemical reactors involving physical and chemical change. The requirement of this process has always been to obtain an energy efficient and environmental friendly mixing in multifunctional heat exchangers/chemical reactors. Poor mixing can affect the product quantity and quality as well as other losses. The passive control of mixing enhancement is meant to the special surface geometries or fluid additives. This work emphasizes on the tracer deformation and analysis of cross-sectional concentration distribution due to imposition of pulsation. An experimental system comprising of a pulsation generator (scotch-yoke mechanism), a 90 curved pipe and a tracer injection system is used. Measurements are carried out by a Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) technique. To avoid laser light diffraction effects during experiments, a T-shaped flow divider are installed at the exit of the 90curved pipe. The measurements are carried out for a range of steady Reynolds number Rest 1420-10001 and different values of Womersley frequency parameter a for a velocity amplitude ratio 13 = 1. Tracer distribution due to pulsation in a curved pipe flow is observed. Effects of pulsation on the mixing in laminar flow regime are analyzed. The results showed an important and encouraging role of pulsatile flow on mixing enhancement. Keywords: chemical reactors, energy systems, industrial processes, Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) technique Citedy By: Design and characterization of rectangular stud antenna [PDF] Author: Khan, S., Ahmad, N., Wahid, M., Baloch, B. and Naeem, M. Journal: Sindh University Research Journal,,Vol.47(1),2015--Pages29--34 Abstract: This paper refers to the investigation and design of Stud (Cup link) Antenna. Studs are part of daily wears. Studs are available in various shapes and designs. To investigate the electromagnetic behavior of studs and its use as antenna, the analysis shows that studs can be used as antenna and it radiates electromagnetic energy from guided medium to free space. A rectangular stud antenna is considered and it parameters e.g. resonant frequency, directivity, radiation efficiency, half power beam width etc are calculated. The effects of dimensions e.g. length, width and thickness of conductor and substrate on resonant frequency, directivity and radiation efficiency are analyzed and it has been observed that these parameters can been modified by changing the dimensions of stud antenna Keywords: Citedy By: DFT studies of indium nanoclusters; nanotubes and their interaction with molecular hydrogen. [PDF] Author: Hussain, A., Baig, M. W. and Mustafa, N. Journal: Nucleus,,Vol.52(4),2015--Pages185--191 Abstract: Density functional theory calculations have been performed on Indium nanoclusters (Inn; n= 3 to 10) to explore the relative stability among their different isomers and interaction with H2. Geometry optimizations starting from initial candidate geometries were performed for each cluster size; so as to determine a few low energy isomers for each size. Clusters with planar configuration and high symmetry are found to be more stable. For n=8; there comes transition from 2D to 3D structures. Energetically favorable isomers of indium nanoclusters for each size were considered to get H2 adsorbed. In general H2 interaction with these clusters is weak but with those comprising of some odd number of atoms i.e. 5; 7 and 9 is considerable. Indium nanotube also indicates H2 adsorption but Eads increases many folds on introduction of defect in the tube. On the basis of DFT investigations; it is suggested that apparently indium nanoclusters and tubes of specific size seem better candidates for materials to store hydrogen Keywords: Adsorption, Density functional theory, Hydrogen gas, Indium nanoclusters, Indium nanotube Citedy By: Electrical energy saving and management initiatives: A case study of university libraries in KPK, Pakistan [PDF] Author: Hassan, S. Z., Karnal, T., Hassnain, S. R., Ali, H. and Saleem, A. Journal: Nucleus,,Vol.52(1),2015--Pages1--8 Abstract: Several recent studies show that a significant portion of the electrical energy consumption in educational institutes, residential and business buildings are due to the improper use of electrical appliances. The objective of this paper is to develop a cost effective automated power management system for the academic institutions to reduce the consumption of electrical energy. To this aim, a sensor-based intelligent system and decision making algorithm are proposed. As per algorithm, the system monitors the number of persons, intensity of light, temperature and accordingly controls the behavior of appliances. This paper includes a case study of two university libraries in KPK, Pakistan, namely, University of Engineering and Technology(UET), Peshawar, Abbottabad Campus and Hazara University Mansehra. The analysis of the experimental results concludes that the proposed energy saving system (PESS) is able to provide a significant energy savings. Keywords: energy savings, electricity consumption, KPK, Pakistan, automated power management system, buildings. Citedy By: Frequency control in CIGRE low voltage distribution network with significant amounts of inverter based generators [PDF] Author: Bhutto, G. M., Keerio, M. U., Talani, R. A. and Buriro, E. A. Journal: Quaid-e-Awam University Research Journal of Engineering, Science and Technology,,Vol.14(1),2015--Pages19--24 Abstract: Maintaining demand side supply and regulating frequency in power networks are the prime requirements of the modern power systems. The frequency of the power system deviates from its nominal value if there is mismatch between power generation and the consumption. If the active power demand is higher than the active power production in the network, the frequency decreases and vice versa. The increase or the decrease in the frequency can be compensated by balancing the generation and load demands. This is normally done by allocating reserve units or by using inverter based generators such as Battery Energy Storage Devices (BESDs). The main focus of this paper is to control the frequency of the network by providing/absorbing the required/extra amounts of the power by BESDs. The work is done on a simple network and simulations are carried out by using DIgSILENT power factory software version 15.0. The procedure of modeling BES which should operate as Battery Energy Storage equipped Static Compensator (BES-STATCOM) developed in DIgSILENT power factory is also described in this paper Keywords: low voltage distribution network, inverter based generators. Citedy By: Survey of waste collection and its energy generation potential in Nawanshehr, Pakistan [PDF] Author: Bhatti, Z. A., Maqbool, F., Farooq, J., Qayyum, S. and Malik, A. H. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,,Vol.34(3),2015--Pages130--134 Abstract: The present study highlights the current status of solid waste collection and disposal practices in Nawanshehr, Abbottabad Pakistan along with its possible management. It involved the surveys of different places such as general stores, tailor shops, cotton processing etc, during the month of July to October 2010. It is estimated that an average 7-8 t of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) is generated daily of which 2-3 t is collected by the local administration and dumped at Salhad solid waste dumping site. This waste can be efficiently used to produce electricity and biogas. Total 3000 t of MSW annually formed which is use to produce 1.9106 kWhe amount of electricity. Major proportion of the generated MSW goes to open drains of the town and taken away to the Mandrocha Katha by the water flow, worsening the facilities of drinking water quality of this natural water stream, it is further ended into Daurr River. It is recommended that organic waste may be employed for many beneficial uses. With the collaboration of industrialists, a small scale fertilizer factory may be established. This will fulfill the fertilizer demands of local farmers to increase crop productivity. Keywords: waste collection, energy generation, biogass, Nawanshehr, Pakistan Citedy By: Treatment of textile effluents by low cost agricultural wastes: Batch biosorption study. [PDF] Author: Bhatti, H. N., Sadaf, S. and Aleem, A. Journal: Journal of Animal and Plant sciences, ,Vol.25(1),2015--Pages284--289 Abstract: The present investigation deals with the treatment of different dye containing effluents by using different agricultural waste biomasses (corncobs, sugarcane bagasse, cotton sticks, sunflower and peanut husk). Samples of textile wastewater were collected from five different textile industries of Faisalabad, Pakistan. Screening test was conducted to select the biosorbent with maximum dye removal efficiency for each of textile wastewater samples. Different process parameters like biosorbent dose, shaking speed and temperature were optimized during the study. The biosorption process using corncobs biomass was found to be good for the removal of dyes up to 79 \% from the one real textile wastewater sample. The biosorption efficiency of adsorbents was maximum at 0.3 g 50mL-1 of adsorbent dose with 120 rpm shaking speed and 303 K temperature. Thermodynamic study was also carried out to evaluate different parameters like free energy change ($\Delta$G), enthalpy change ($\Delta$H) and entropy change ($\Delta$S) and biosorption process was found to be exothermic. Characterization of effluents was carried out before and after the biosorption process to check out the effect of process on the removal of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) and Total Suspended Solids (TSS). The results proved that agricultural wastes are good option for the removal of color and COD from real textile effluents. Keywords: textile effluents, agricultural wastes, Batch biosorption Citedy By: Evaluation of optimal top coat thickness in composite LTA/YSZ thermal barrier coating by comparative stress distribution using finite element method [PDF] Author: Aziz, R., Pasha, R., Nasir, M. A. and Abbas, M. Journal: Nucleus,Vol.52(4),2015--Pages146--150 Abstract: Demand of high operating temperature in gas turbines for better efficiencies has forced researchers to explore novel materials with improved thermal properties. In this regard; LaTi2Al9O19 (LTA) is recently declared as a brilliant candidate for thermal barrier coatings (TBCs). Owing to potential advantages like high temperature stability \& low thermal conductivity; researchers are striving to use it for modern gas turbines. An innovative concept of composite ceramic coating (LTA+YSZ) has been introduced to achieve improved set of thermal \& mechanical properties. In this paper; a finite element analysis (FEA) has been employed to observe stress scattering with relatively varying thicknesses of compositional ceramic coats using commercially available software ANSYS. Optimum set of variables has been proposed based on the associative stress state data calculated from FEA results. Radial \& axial stresses ($\sigma$xx; $\sigma$yy) are ascertained for composite system and ultimate values of stress are offered for comparison on quantitative grounds. Elastic strain energy stored in TGO is determined based on FE results to estimate the structural reliability of TBC. Conclusively; trend reveals that both radial \& axial stresses are respectively proportional to increasing \& decreasing thickness of YSZ. Comparing elastic strain energies; maximum life is evaluated in 1:4 for YSZ: LTA which shows that composite layer TBC system have improved stability than single layer system as reported in literature. Keywords: Ceramic coating, Finite element analysis, Finite element method, Stress distribution, Thermal barrier coating, Thermal barrier coatings Citedy By: Dielectric characterization of XAl204 (X = Mg; Zn; Ni) spinel ceramics. [PDF] Author: Azam, M., Atiq, S., Mustafa, G. M., Riaz, S. and Naseem, S. Journal: Nucleus,,Vol.52(4),2015--Pages204--208 Abstract: Spherical nanoparticles of XAl204 = Mg; Zn; Ni) ceramics with large surface area and finely distributed grains; were successfully synthesized by sol-gel auto-combustion method. The formation of spinel structure of X41204 nanoparticles was confirmed by X-ray diffraction. Dielectric tangent loss was decreased as the frequency was increased while a slight increase in the dielectric parameters was observed as the temperature was increased; mainly due to the thermally activated charge carriers. The behavior of real and imaginary parts of impedance has also been discussed which confirms the results from the tangent loss plot. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy gives the true stoichiometric at \% and wt \% contents of various elements present in the samples. The grain size of the synthesized sample range from 20-70 nm and were obtained when the samples were sintered at 900 C for 4 hrs Keywords: Impedance analysis, Sol-gel, Spinel ceramics,X-ray diffraction, X41204 nanoparticles Citedy By: Performance evaluation of sugarcane stripper for trash recovery. [PDF] Author: Ashfaq, S., Ghafoor, A., Ahmad, M. and Yaqub, Q. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences,,Vol.52(2),2015--Pages491496, Abstract: The limited resources of fossil fuels and increasing price of electricity has resulted severe energy crises in Pakistan. Being an agricultural country, Pakistan has huge potential of biomass that can be used as an alternate source to produce energy. In, Pakistan sugarcane trash can be used as one of the available biomass resources for energy production. Nearly 5. 75 million tons of trash per year is available as a biomass in Pakistan. The manual removal of trash is a labor extensive and time consuming process. Sugar cane stripper can be used to remove trash from the sugarcane stalks. Agricultural Mechanization Research Institute (AMRI) Wing, Faisalabad has designed and developed a sugarcane stripper. In this study, the performance evaluation of sugarcane stripper has been carried out for the recovery of sugar cane trash for energy production. The experiments were conducted on three varieties of sugarcane V1 as (COL1148), V2 as (FH-237) and V3 as (MO-240), three sprocket speeds NS1 as (250 rpm), NS2 as (200 rpm)and NS3 as (150 rpm) and three blower speeds NB1 as (750 rpm), NB2 as (1000 rpm), and NB3 as (1500 rpm). The cost comparison of sugarcane stripper has also been carried out in comparison with conventional (manual) method of de-trashing. The result showed that the best combination to get maximum sugarcane stripper efficiency of 79 \% was using sprocket speed of NS3 (150rpm) and blower speed of NB3 (1500rpm) for all the varieties of sugarcane. The operational cost of sugarcane stripper and conventional method were calculated as Rs. 17120/ha and Rs. 19200/ha, respectively. Keywords: biomass, sugarcane stripper, Citedy By: A new itinerary planning approach among multiple mobile agents in wireless sensor networks (WSN) to reduce energy consumption [PDF] Author: Alouil, I., Kazarl, O., Kahloull, L. and Servigne, S. Journal: International Journal of Communication Networks and Information Security,Vol.7(2),2015--Pages116--122 Abstract: one of the important challenges in wireless sensors networks (WSN) resides in energy consumption. In order to resolve this limitation, several solutions were proposed. Recently, the exploitation of mobile agent technologies in wireless sensor networks to optimize energy consumption attracts researchers. Despite their advantage as an ambitious solution, the itineraries followed by migrating mobile agents can surcharge the network and so have an impact on energy consumption. Many researchers have dealt with itinerary planning in WSNs through the use of a single agent (SIP: Single agent Itinerary Planning) or multiple mobile agents (MIP: Multiple agents Itinerary Planning). However, the use of multi-agents causes the emergence of the data load unbalancing problem among mobile agents, where the geographical distance is the unique factor motivating to plan the itinerary of the agents. The data balancing factor has an important role especially in wireless sensor networks multimedia that owns a considerable volume of data size. It helps to optimize the tasks duration and thus optimizes the overall answer time of the network. In this paper, we provide a new MIP solution (GIGM-MIP) which is based not only on geographic information but also on the amount of data provided by each node to reduce the energy consumption of the network. The simulation experiments show that our approach is more efficient than other approaches in terms of task duration and the amount of energy consumption. Keywords: wireless sensors networks, energy consumption Citedy By: Analysis of schemes to improve efficiency of solar cells. [PDF] Author: Ahmed, S., Khalid, M., Khalid, M., Aslam, M. I. and Rasheed, H. Journal: Bahria University Journal of Information & Communication Technologies,Vol.8(1),2015--Pages105--109 Abstract: Due to the presence of different losses, the highest efficiency obtained using solar cells is less than 30 \% , which is quite low as compare to other conventional energy resources. Variety of schemes has been proposed in the literature to improve overall efficiency of a solar cell. This paper presents a review of different schemes proposed for enhancing solar cell efficiency. In this work, we analyze the effect of introducing transparent conducting oxide layer, front and rear texturing, back surface field, multi-junctions, top service passivation, selective ohmic contact, quantum dots, and antireflection coating on the performance of solar cells. We also review major factors that limit the conversion efficiency in solar cells and their remedies which could be incorporated with various schemes to enhance efficiency of solar cells. Keywords: solar cells, antireflection coating Citedy By: Green net: Agent based energy load prediction techniques for smart grid. [PDF] Author: Afzaal, A., Nazir, M., Ali, A. H. and Sabah, A. Journal: Bahria University Journal of Information & Communication Technologies,,Vol.8(1),2015--Pages27--32 Abstract: To maintain the reliable delivery of energy with increasing demand is becoming a challenging task with such a dumb electricity distribution system. The ongoing reformation of ancient distribution infrastructure is an effort to enhance its performance so that energy can be consumed with greater proficiency. Smart grid is an advanced concept, which adds intelligence, networking and bi-directional communication features to the existing energy infrastructure. To efficiently utilize the system capabilities, prediction of upcoming energy load on the network is an important task. With a more accurate load forecasting, the smart grid can enhance the management of its resources and expand the economics of energy commerce with electricity markets. A new agent based energy load prediction technique is proposed in this paper, which will predict the load of smart home, one hour prior use. Agents are divided into a group of experts, which will use weighted average prediction methodology to predict the upcoming demand of energy. Simulation results show that by implementing the proposed methodology; we can get 80 percent accurate results of load prediction that will make the electricity grid more reliable and efficient. Keywords: electricity distribution system, energy infrastructure, energy load prediction technique Citedy By: Structural and magnetic studies of NixCoo8-xMno.2Fe204 Nanoparticles prepared via Co-precipitation rout. [PDF] Author: Adeela, N., Maaz, K., Khan, U., Iqba, M., Hussainl, M., Nisar, A., Ahmad, M. and Karim, S. Journal: Nucleus,Vol.52(4),2015--Pages151--154 Abstract: Ni substituted Mn-Co ferrite nanoparticles (NiCo0.8 \_ ; Nno.2Fe204); with doping content (x) varying from 0 to 0.1; have been synthesized via co precipitation route. X-ray diffraction reveals the formation of single phase spinel ferrite structure. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy exhibits presence of two absorption bands appearing at 500-600 cm` which are characteristic feature of spinel ferrites. Microstructural analyses were carried out by using scanning electron microscope; transmission electron microscope and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscope which determine the particle size and chemical composition of the synthesized nanoparticles. From TEM results; average particle size was determined to be about 20 nm; which is in good agreement with XRD results. Magnetic results show increase in coercivity and decrease in saturation magnetization with increasing doping concentration Keywords: Coercivity, Ni doped co-Mn ferrites, Saturation magnetization, Structural properties Citedy By: Screening wetland plants for nutrient uptake and bioenergy feedstock production. [PDF] Author: Zhao, F., Liu, C., Rafiq, M. T., Ding, Z., Zeng, Z., Aziz, R. and Yang, X. Journal: International Journal of Agriculture and Biology,,Vol.16(1),2014--Pages213--216 Abstract: The constructed wetlands are considered as low cost systems for treating municipal, industrial and agricultural wastewater. However, there is limited information about the subsequent disposal of how to deal with the harvested biomass. This study was conducted to investigate the phyto-uptake potential of nitrogen and phosphorus of six perennial wetland plants and their biomass potential for bioenergy use. One square meter of aboveground part of each plant species was harvested in triplicate and weighed to determine the biomass. Subsamples were prepared to determine nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) contents. Results indicated that the biomass of giant reed (Arundo donax) was up to 5.59 kg m-2 and its phyto-uptake of N and P in the aboveground tissues was also the highest one followed by green reed (Phragmites (sp.)). Giant reed and green reed had higher calorific value (about 18 MJ kg-1), which was significantly higher than umbrella plant, canna and alligator flag (P = 0.05). Therefore, giant reed and green reed could be the preferential wetland plants for nutrient phyto-uptake and bioenergy feedstock usage Keywords: bioenergy feedstock production, bioenergy feedstock usage, wetland plants. Citedy By: Energy production from waste-water using microbial fuel cells. [PDF] Author: Shah, S. H. and Raja, I. A. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.19(42737),2014--Pages55--62 Abstract: Natural energy sources like fossil fuels are depleting due to increased human activities. Different types of alternatives are being explored to solve this problem with the consideration that they are sustainable. There are many environmental concerns connected with fossil fuel burning which after oxidation processes release greater amounts of carbon emissions in atmosphere. Now the trends are shifting towards exploiting renewable energy options, such as bioethanol, biodiesel, biohydrogen, biogas, and bioelectricity. Bioelectricity is harvested from organic substrates using Microbial Fuel Cells (MFC) that operate on oxidation reduction (redox) reactions. MFCs produce electricity in the presence of microorganisms from biodegradable substances. Waste-water contains enormous amount of organic matter that can be oxidized in MFC for electricity harvesting. In this review, the main focus is made on the applicability of microbial fuels cells for simultaneous waste-water treatment and electricity production. Keywords: Microbial Fuel Cell, bacteria, power, electricity, waste-water. Citedy By: Analyses on utilisation of solar energy as a sustainable source of clean water production [PDF] Author: Shah, S. A., Rafique, S. and Jumani, M. S. Journal: Sindh University Research Journal,,Vol.46(3),2014--Pages315--318 Abstract: Availability of clean water depends on either availability of naturally clean water or supply of sustainable source of energy that can be utilized for clean water production process. Solar energy can be utilized as a sustainable energy means for clean water production process. Prospects of solar energy utilization for water pumping and desalination exist in Pakistan on account of availability of solar energy for most of the day hours and round-the-year. Therefore, research survey is carried out of thermal and solar powered clean water production processes in Pakistan. In this paper, a comparative analysis of conventional thermal powered and solar powered clean treatment processes is carried on parameters of production costs, environmental sustainability and self-contained nature of solar powered clean water production process. Keywords: solar energy utilization, clean water production, water pumping, desalination Citedy By: Prospective study of solar energy as a sustainable energy source of electrical power generation. [PDF] Author: Shah, S. A., Jumani, M. S. and Rafique, S. Journal: Sindh University Research Journal,,Vol.46(4),2014--Pages469--472 Abstract: Utilization of solar energy sources in electrical power generation sector is essential on account of its capability to meet the needs of environmental unsustainability, energy depletion and costs increases. Solar energy source utilization is therefore considered a vital element for ensuring reliability and uninterrupted supply of required electrical power output in Pakistan. The fossil fuels in comparison to solar energy are unsustainable sources on account of their finite nature, environmental unsustainability and unstable production costs. In order to establish this proposition it is essential to evaluate these parameters of thermal and solar powered electrical power generation processes in electrical power generation sector. Therefore, research is carried out to analyze the parameters of input energy requirement, production costs and environmental sustainability of both the thermal and solar electrical power generation processes. The result of the research are analysed for determination are promising for better prospects of medium and large scale solar electrical power generation in Pakistan. Keywords: solar energy, electrical power generation, thermal power generation, production costs, Pakistan Citedy By: Social impacts of biogas plants on rural communities of Sindh, Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Sajjad, A., Khan, L. A., Makhdum, A. H. and Imran, A. Journal: Asian Journal of Agriculture and Biology,,Vol.2(2),2014--Pages80--85 Abstract: Biogas is a very important alternate renewable energy source for the Pakistan where more than 60 \% population lives in rural areas having no access to natural gas. Government aims to exploit the maximum potential of biogas plants within next 10 years. In conjunction with the efforts, United Nations Development Program (UNDP) has installed 2,000 biogas plants in areas along Indus River which were affected by heavy flood during monsoon of 2010. Measuring social impacts of any development project is an important tool to understand its adaptability in any community. The social benefits of biogas plants have widely been accepted in different parts of the world but these may vary across the communities and geographical areas. Current study is a first empirical contribution towards understanding the social impacts of biogas plants on rural communities of Sindh, Pakistan. Besides improving kitchen environment and reducing the disease incidences, biogas plants also significantly reduced fuel wood consumption and its cost (ca. 48 \% ) without consuming extra working hours. Keywords: biogas plants, Social impacts, rural communities, Sindh, Pakistan. Citedy By: Potential of biogas technology using different biomasses in developing countries. [PDF] Author: Mahmood, Q. and Shah, F. A. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.20(1),2014--Pages43--56 Abstract: Developing countries are facing critical energy crises. Ever-increasing prices of fossil fuels have resulted in serious impacts on the lives of common people in many developing countries. The environmental phenomena are being seriously affected consequent to increased use of fossil fuels. The renewable energy offers better choice as it is clean source of energy. In view of the limited supply of fossil fuels, biofuels have been considered as future fuels. The demand of biogas technology is increasing and various researchers are trying to improve it. These are lowcost systems and can be run with very small budget. An increased focus is being placed over the use of anaerobic treatment for a number of reasons, including; energy recovery; minimizing the harmful effects of suspended solids; cutting down the cost of waste treatment to almost half over aerobic systems; resultant digestate to be used for land farming; and its compactness as a treatment system. This review focuses on the low cost bioenergy sources in developing countries of the world. Various practical aspects of biogas generation and factors influencing it have been presented. The potential of various biomasses, especially algal biomass, has also been discussed. Keywords: energy crises, biofuels, biogas technology, developing countries. Citedy By: Case study of energy saving in an industrial setup by replacing conventional bulbs with led lights. [PDF] Author: Khanam, S. and Hanif, A. Journal: Nucleus,Vol.51(3),2014--Pages373--378 Abstract: Lighting accounts for roughly one-fifth of global electricity consumption. The demand for energy is increasing day by day with increase in population, change in life style, and change in technology. This growing demand led to energy crisis which is the biggest threat for economic stability for developing countries like Pakistan. This crisis has badly affected the everyday life and industry. To overcome energy shortfall one solution is to focus on energy conservation. Significant energy savings can be achieved by reducing energy consumption by artificial lighting which has potential of energy saving by using efficient lighting technologies such as Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs). A case study is carried out for an industrial setup to compare the performance, suitability and financial effects of conventional bulbs and LED lights in an industrial setup. A new lighting scheme has been designed by using DIALux 4.11 simulation software based on international standards of Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).The conventional bulbs on the shop floor has been replaced with LED lights as per software design. After hardware installation it is revealed that by adopting this lighting scheme there is 45 \% of energy savings and user satisfaction with financial savings of Rs. 912,711 per year having 3.78 years pay back period that justifies use of LEDs as per proposed lightning design for general lighting applications. Keywords: energy saving, industrial setup, electricity consumption, efficient lighting technologies Citedy By: Exploring the linkages between energy use and economic growth in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Kakar, A., Ahmed, M., Mahmood, A. and Sarwar, B. Journal: Journal of Applied and Emerging Sciences,Vol.3(2),2014--Pages192--196 Abstract: The objective of this study was to investigate the linkages between energy use, and economic activities in Pakistan. This study tested the interrelationship among the variables using the Multiple Regression analysis through the estimation of log-linear model. The empirical results of this study suggest that the electricity consumption is one of the most significant variables in the economic performance of Pakistan followed by the population growth, Foreign Direct Investment and trade openness. Keywords: population growth, Foreign Direct Investment and trade openness, energy use, economic growth, Pakistan Citedy By: Wind speed analysis of some coastal areas near Karachi. [PDF] Author: Hussain, M. A., Abbas, S., Ansari, M. R. K., Zaffar, A. and Jan, B. Journal: Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences,,Vol.51(1),2014--Pages83--91 Abstract: This communication attempts to analyze Karachi coastal area (Paradise Point 24.84 \textordmasculine E, 66.77 \textordmasculine N)) for an understanding of underlying probability distribution. It has been found that at this site the annual wind speed at a height of 30 meters remains very close to 7 m/s whereas at a height of 61 meters the wind speed reaches to 9 m/s. Moreover, the wind mostly remains directed towards southwest. Furthermore, the annual average wind speed follows Weibull distribution and the annual average wind speed goes on increasing with the passage of time. Maximum energy together with the energy density for different values of the wind mill blade diameters is also calculated. Our analysis shows that the wind speed is increasing as a consequence of global climate change. Though the global climate change has created many threats to the humanity by influencing the local urban microclimate but the positive aspect of this finding is that the increase in wind speed will increase the feasibility and economic viability of the construction of wind farms near Karachi coast and offshore. Of course these calculations will be useful for urban and energy planners. Keywords: Wind speed analysis, coastal areas, Karachi, Pakistan Citedy By: Greening the networks: A comparative analysis of different energy efficient techniques. [PDF] Author: Arshad, M. J., Saeed, S. S., Javed, N. and Durrani, A. I. Journal: Nucleus,,Vol.51(2),2014--Pages233--238 Abstract: From a room electric bulb to the gigantic backbone networks energy savings have now become a matter of considerable concern. Issues such as resource depletion, global warming, high energy consumptions and environmental threats gave birth to the idea of green networking. Serious efforts have been done in this regard on large scale in the ICT sector. In this work first we give an idea of how and why this modern technology emerged. We then formulate a precise definition of the term green technology. We then discuss some leading techniques which are promising to produce green-results when implemented on real time network systems. These technologies are viewed from different perspectives e.g. hardware implementations, software mechanisms and protocol changing's etc. We then compare these techniques based on some pivotal points. The main conclusion is that a detailed comparison is needed for selecting a technology to implement on a network system. Keywords: energy efficient techniques, energy savings, energy consumption Citedy By: Harvesting electrical energy from water supply tank. [PDF] Author: Ali, F. and Arbab, M. N. Journal: Sindh University Research Journal,,Vol.46(2),2014--Pages169--174 Abstract: Efficiency plays an important role while considering any practical system. Generally electrical means are used to pump water into water supply tanks. At day time the water is allowed to rush through the distribution pipe and is supplied to the consumers. This supply is periodic (almost twice a day) and for a time duration of two hours. In country like Pakistan where we are faced with energy crises its role can be manipulated, and with certain modifications and additions the available potential energy can be utilized to generate electrical power as a byproduct in addition to water supply. This would make the system highly efficient, economical and we would have energy recovery from the system. This energy can be either utilized directly or can be stored in batteries for later use. Keywords: electrical energy, water supply tank, Pakistan Citedy By: Minimizing natural gas consumption through solar water heating [PDF] Author: Ahmed, S., Lohano, M., Javed, M. A. and Waqas, A. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.19(42737),2014--Pages79--84 Abstract: Natural gas has 43.2 \% share in Pakistan's energy mix, while 18.7 \% of the total natural gas is being consumed by the domestic sector. Statistical data shows that over the last ten years gas consumption by the domestic sector has increased from 144 to 232 billion cubic feet. Pakistan is facing extreme shortage of natural gas, especially in winters due to increased demand in domestic sector for space- and water heating. Utilization of solar energy resource can effectively contribute towards shifting natural gas utilization from domestic to industrial sector of the country. This study helped analyze the quantity of natural gas saved and GHG reduction and economic benefits obtained due to shifting to solar water heating. Results of the study showed that by utilizing single unit of evacuated tube solar water heater in Quetta, 7.7 mmBtu of natural gas can be saved with net present value (NPV) of PKR 243,310 and 10 tones of GHG is saved from entering into the atmosphere. RETScreen, evacuated tube solar water heater, net present value. Keywords: natural gas consumption, solar water heating, Quetta, Pakistan, solar energy Citedy By: Energy and emission benefit analysis of solar powered electrical power generation in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Shah, S. A., Daudpoto, J. and Abbasi, A. F. Journal: Sindh University Research Journal,,Vol.45(2),2014--Pages417--420 Abstract: An analysis of solar power generation and CO2 emission reductions for a site at Sukkur, Pakistan is carried out to demonstrate the capability of solar powered power generation as an alternative valuable energy source to conventional fossil fuelled power generation systems. In this paper, energy and emission analyses are used as means for an estimation of the amount of electrical power that can be produced and along with CO2 emissions reduction per specific area per time, if solar energy is used as an alternative fuel for power generation. The results show solar potential is more than adequate for electrical power production to meet the local electricity needs in environmentally sustainable manner on account of considerable amount of emissions that could be avoided accordingly. Keywords: Carbon dioxide emission, Electrical power, Emissions reduction, Energy crisis, Environmental sustainability, Solar power Citedy By: Electricity consumption for energy conservation in office buildings in Lahore-Pakistan [PDF] Author: Saeed, Khan, A., Arif, S. and Mushtaq, M. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Science,,Vol.65(2),2013--Pages243--246 Abstract: It has become a popular practice to design highly glazed high rise office buildings in Lahore. The electricity consumption in these buildings is becoming a severe problem in the absence of climatic considerations. Therefore, simulations become a need to evaluate such type of buildings for energy conservation. This paper presents analysis of electricity consumption for typical highly glazed office building in Lahore through simulations process. The parameters selected for simulation were the orientation, shape of building, elements of fa \c c ade such as windows, their size and the type of glazing. The paper concludes that highly glazed buildings require huge electricity than the buildings designed with climatic considerations Keywords: Electricity, Energy conservation, Glazing, Lahore, Office buildings, Pakistan, Simulations Citedy By: Comparison of energy and yield parameters in maize crop. [PDF] Author: Memon,S. Q., Mirjat, M. S., Mughal, A. Q., Amjad, N. and Ibupoto, K. A. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,,Vol.32(3),2013--Pages244--250 Abstract: The aim of this study was to determine direct and indirect input energy in maize production and to investigate the efficiency of energy consumption in maize crop. Result showed that emergence percent, plant height, number of grains per cob and grain yield were the highest in deep tillage as compared to conventional and zero tillage. Total energy input and output were the highest in deep tillage with NPK @ 150-75-75kg/ha. The net energy gain was found the highest in deep tillage followed by conventional tillage and the lowest net energy gain in zero tillage Keywords: Deep tillage, Energy, Maize yield, Zero tillage Citedy By: Energy conservation through energy efficient motors in Pakistan's industrial sector. [PDF] Author: Baloch, M. H., Maheshwari, M. K. and Memon, A. A. Journal: Sindh University Research Journal, ,Vol.45(3),2013--Pages501--506 Abstract: Pakistan is facing the electricity crises in present time. Globally, it is seen that many countries use the energy efficiency standards for electric motors on voluntarily and mandatorily regulation basis. This paper presents the analysis of motors in industrial sector where the existing motors are compared and replaced with energy efficient motors. The result comes with less than 4 years payback. For countries like Pakistan where 8 to 10 hours load shedding in urban areas and 10-12 hours load shedding in rural area with deficit of 6000MW to 8000MW reduce the socio-economic development, so it is necessary to optimize the efficiency of electric motors installed in different industrial sectors. Keywords: Efficient motors, Energy conservation, Energy survey, Industrial motors, Pakistan Citedy By: Bioethanol: A sustainable and environment friendly solution for Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Arshad, M. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.16(1),2013--Pages21--26 Abstract: Ethanol has the potential to reduce total dependence on fossil fuels for energy needs and mitigate environmental pollution. Presently, it is substituting approximately 3 \% of the fossil-based gasoline consumed world over. In Pakistan, bioethanol is produced through fermentation of sugarcane molasses. Petrol consumption in is approximately 1.6 million tons, and 10 \% blending of ethanol can give rise to 160,000 tons of fuel ethanol consumption. Pakistan has the capacity to produce this quantity of ethanol from sugarcane molasses. By implementing an ethanol blending programme, the environmental benefits, particularly reduced emission of greenhouse gases, can be achieved. This will also help to meet the future energy needs as well as save the national exchequer. Keywords: Bioethanol, Energy needs, Environmental pollution, Fossil fuels, Sugercane molasses Citedy By: Impact of biogas technology in the development of rural population. [PDF] Author: Ali, S., Zahra, N., Nasreen, Z. and Usman, S. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Analytical & Environmental Chemistry,Vol.14(2),2013--Pages65--74 Abstract: Biogas technology is useful technology to produce a renewable, high-quality fuel i.e. biogas. In Rural areas people use biomass fuels (firewood and dried dung) for meeting their energy utilization demands. This demand is fulfilled by deforestation and land degradation which results in different health and societal problems and also cause excessive emission of greenhouse gases. The rural population of developing countries is in dire need of biogas for cooking, lighting, heating and feedstock etc. The biogas production derives from various agricultural resources, such as manure and harvest remains enormously available. Biogas technology represents a sustainable way to produce energy for household, particularly in developing countries. It can be cost-effective and environment friendly technology for the people in rural areas. So, Biogas can be a best substitute of biomass fuels for use in rural areas. This review evaluates the use of biogas in developing rural areas and glances at problems and challenges as well as benefits and success factors. Keywords: biogass technology, rural population, biomass fuels, agricultural resources Citedy By: Energy crises and solutions. [PDF] Author: Ali, I. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,,Vol.32(4),2013--Pages319--327 Abstract: Energy consumption is one of the parameters for measuring the prosperity of a country. Energy situation of Pakistan has been critical for the last few years as the reserves of natural resources of energy are depleting at a very fast rate, resulting in the current energy crises and load shedding, badly affecting industrial and agricultural growth. Based on the observations and experience, energy resources of the country have been discussed, emphasising on the utilisation of indigenous resources, particularly, coal and hydel resources for minimising dependence on imported energy. Research and development work, carried out in the country on various fuels, has been discussed. Among them coal briquetting, coal carbonization (coking) of Sharigh coal, extraction of chemicals and desulphurisation of Pakistani lignites have been discussed. Studies on alternate/renewable and non-conventional sources of energy have also been presented with special reference to bio-gas, solar and wind energies, etc. Keywords: Coal briquetting, Energy, Hydel power, Pakistan Citedy By: A review of mineral carbonation by enhanced weathering. [PDF] Author: Saeed, A. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,,Vol.31(3),2012--Pages195--201 Abstract: Climate change mitigation efforts have so far failed to achieve rapid rates of de-carbonisation. A technical possibility can still be realised. However, the long residence time of CO2 in the atmosphere would continue the warming trend for the foreseeable future even if emissions were immediately cut to zero. Geoengineering methods provide a useful complement to mitigation and adaptation. The emission of CO2 from power stations operating on fossil fuel and other sources can be handled by only three types of storage technologies including: (1) ocean storage, (2) geological storage (geosequestration), and (3) CO2 mineralization or mineral carbonation (geomimicry). This last option provides a permanent solution to storing CO2 safely on a geological time scale. The high cost and elevated energy requirements are preventing this technology from reaching industrial scale. Ultramafic complexes and serpentinite bodies are major sources of magnesium-rich minerals like olivine and serpentine, which can be carbonated by using CO2. The ultramafic rocks of the Great Serpentinite Belt (GSB), northern New South Wales, Australia, have been identified as a high-potential feedstock for mineral carbonation. These deposits indicate variable degrees of carbonation. The source of carbon in ultramafic rocks hosted magnesite veins and deposits are still under debate but agreement appears to be emerging on their near surface formation at low temperature pressure condition. The petrographic and geochemical studies on serpentinite and magnesite have revealed the possibilities of finding the agent/catalyst that could enhance the process of carbonation by using the atmospheric CO2. The list of advantages for Mineral Carbonation over alternative methods for large scale CO2 sequestration is quite long and the fact that Pakistan has substantial amount of serpentine, for example, in Taleri Mohammad Jan village near Hindubagh, opens up the opportunities to carry forward the study on Mineral Carbonation in Pakistan and this could reveal highly effective results. Keywords: Geo-sequestration, Mineral carbonation, Pakistan, Review, Serpentinite, Weathering Citedy By: Renewable energy in Pakistan: Opportunities and challenges. [PDF] Author: Mirza, I. A., Ahmed, S. and Khalil, M. S. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.16(0),2012--Pages13--20 Abstract: Most of the countries around the world have realized that the key to attaining and maintaining prosperity and sovereignty is having independence and self reliance in access to and subsequent use of energy. To address the global challenges, the energy system needs to undergo a transformation from fossil-fuels to renewable energy and energy efficient technologies. Pakistan has a huge potential for harnessing renewable energy and its share in the electricity mix has to be increased to achieve energy security. Security issues and circular debt are the key challenges that need to be addressed to promote on-grid renewable energy through private sector. Around 38 \% of the total Pakistani population remains without access to electricity. Fifty four per cent of the rural population currently has no access to electricity, forcing them to live a sub-standard life of poverty and social inequity. Microfinance and other innovative financial tools need to be evolved to promote rural electrification through renewable energies. Keywords: Electricity, Energy efficient technologies, Pakistan, Renewable energy, Rural electrification, Security issue Citedy By: A review of coal and water resources of Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Malkani, M. S. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,,Vol.31(3),2012--Pages202--218 Abstract: Pakistan represents Pre-Cambrian to recent strata with different tectonometallic and sedimentary basins. Pakistan has large reserves of coal but the deposits need to be exploited for provincial and national development. Coal resources and their discoveries are necessary in order to meet increasing demands. Share of coal in energy sector of Pakistan has increased from 6.5 \% (2003-04) to 7.6 \% (2008-09) and but later fell back to 6.7 \% (2010-11). Considering growing energy needs, this figure should have been more than its predecessor. Balochistan province tops coal production with a 58 \% share. Pakistan is ranked 7th internationally regarding lignitic coal reserves but, unluckily, Pakistan steel industry has imported from 2.84mt to 4.27mt coal per year between 2006 and 2011. This expenditure can be saved and spent on research and technology development. Furthermore, thermal power plants should be installed to use indigenous coal reserves to increase electrical power supply, keeping in view the population increase. Developments for coal resources are necessary due to increasing energy demand in Pakistan, whereas in Pakistan, many coal fields remain under-developed. To develop these coalfields, it is necessary to create the technology to use the mixed lignitic, subbituminous and bituminous coal because majority of the reserves are lignitic in Pakistan. The Thar coal deposit of Sindh is lignitic and available in grand quantity. Its development should be started on trial basis initially as vertical shaft mining method. Alternatively, open pit mining could be opted for but ground water may cause trouble in this regard. Pakistan has mountaineous areas to store rain water and plain areas for irrigation but most of surface water is being wasted as flood. The construction of major dams has mostly been hampered for a variety of reasons. As population increases, construction of smaller dams in all provinces, districts and even tehsil levels proportionally increases. Furthermore, at the mouth of main stream/nalas/rud streaming from mountains, radial tributaries may be constructed in Daman/barren lands to provide water for cultivation. Water resources wasting as flood begs for construction of small dams especially in Kohat and Potwar (upper Indus); Sulaiman (middle Indus) and Kirthar (lower Indus) basins and Balochistan basin of Pakistan which holds its vast plain areas. The main purposes and goals of the present study are to present handy and brief information based on previous and recent wide spread work and also recent discoveries. Furthermore, water resources and their dam constructions are also vital for the development of Pakistan due to increasing population. Due to these reasons, here coal and water resources are briefly being discussed. Keywords: Coal resources, Dense population, Energy, Pakistan, Review, Water dams, Water resources Citedy By: Biodiesel production from algae. [PDF] Author: Khola, G. and Ghazala, B. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Botany,,Vol.44(1),2012--Pages379--381 Abstract: Algae appear to be an emerging source of biomass for biodiesel that has the potential to completely displace fossil fuel. Two thirds of earth \& rsquo;s surface is covered with water, thus algae would truly be renewable option of great potential for global energy needs. This study discusses specific and comparative biodiesel quantitative potential of Cladophora sp., also highlighting its biomass (after oil extraction), pH and sediments (glycerine, water and pigments) quantitative properties. Comparison of Cladophora sp., with Oedogonium sp., and Spirogyra sp., (Hossain et al., 2008) shows that Cladophora sp., produce higher quantity of biodiesel than Spirogyra sp., whereas biomass and sediments were higher than the both algal specimens in comparison to the results obtained by earlier workers. No prominent difference in pH of biodiesel was found. In Pakistan this is a first step towards biodiesel production from algae. Results indicate that Cladophora sp., provide a reasonable quantity of biodiesel, its greater biomass after oil extraction and sediments make it a better option for biodiesel production than the comparing species. Keywords: Algae, Biodiesel, Cladophora,Oedogonium, Spirogyra Citedy By: Powering the people beyond 2050. [PDF] Author: Khan, N. and Abas, N. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,,Vol.31(2),2012--Pages133--151 Abstract: Accessible energy resources are declining due to increasing population, growing demands and depleting fossil fuel reserves. Worldwide utilities deregulation practices, privatisation, globalisation and political unrests are forcing individual nations to think of their energy outreach. Average energy consumption of 32 \% of us all is as high as 6795kWh/yr/person whilst just 1313kWh/yr/person for remaining 68 \% people. Oil and gas peaking fears from 2010 to 2017 and depletion by 2050 to 2060 are leading the individual countries to follow a blind race to explore and harness new energy sources i.e. the nuclear energy. Global energy consumption rate is about 474x1018J out of which 82 \% is derived from fossil fuels and 18 \% from renewable energy resources. Annual global power consumption is about 15TW which is less than 1 \% of daily solar power supply. Sun shines earth with 89PW that we receive at rate 1321 to 1412W/m2. In addition to continued natural solar power supply we will have coal and uranium reserves at least up to middle of next century. Technical analysis and engineering judgment shows there is not any immediate threat to human survival due to food and energy; however, it will not be available as much economic as oil. Apart from conventional measures like increasing machine efficiency, improving efficient energy use, promoting energy conservation, opting austerity and frugality, we also need to explore unconventional natural energy resources. This paper introduces two novel, unconventional energy resources consisting of earth batteries and atmospheric electricity. This work concludes to join the global grand energy transition (GET) effort by adopting 100 \% renewable energy policy 2050. Keywords: Energy crisis, Energy resources, Pakistan, Renewable energy Citedy By: An eco-green building: Parameters and constraints. [PDF] Author: Hussain, M. Journal: Environ Monitor,,Vol.12(42861),2012--Pages7--9 Abstract: Concept of sustainable development has become the todays doctrine as against idea of economic growth in the recent past. Undoubtedly the humanity had embarked upon enhancing the pace of progress and prosperity without caring for the natural environment. Now nations of the world have realized that for sustainable development both environment and development have to proceed together on basis of mutual respect for each other. Therefore, it is imperative that the developmental projects must be economically viable, environmentally benign and socially acceptable. Buildings form part of developmental plans. These are constructed for multifarious needs like residential, office, manufacturing, cultural, educational, recreational, hotel and restaurant. These should be constructed in a sustainable manner with a view to fulfill their respective purpose. Important parameters for an eco-green building are provision of essential utility services, sufficient greenery, efficient energy system, sustainable temperature, proper fresh air ventilation, attractive colour scheme, comfortable space, contemporary design, safety \& security, building codes, optimal utilization of construction materials and national \& global (ASHARE) heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration HVACR standards. The occupants should enjoy occupying their abodes and live or work there in accordance with their whims \& wishes. Implementation of HVACR standards should be accorded top priority from the conceptual stage to the operation \& maintenance period of a structure. Indoor environment of a building should be minimally affected by outdoor pollution. Inside living or working conditions should be designed in a manner that the above mentioned parameters are not conflicting with one another rather all of them contribute their respective share towards well being of the building. Arrangements should be made to continuously monitor the said parameters so that emergence of negative impacts, if any, may be avoided. Also management of the building should be able to take mitigation measures for controlling turbulent situations. In nutshell the physical, biological and socio-economic environments should always be congenial for the users. This is only possible if relevant HVACR standards are implemented throughout life. Keywords: Biological environment, Eco-green building, HVACR standards, Indoor pollution, Outdoor pollution, Physical environment, Socio-economic environment, Sustainable development Citedy By: Nanotechnology for sustainable energy. [PDF] Author: Ali, M. A. A. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.16(0),2012--Pages1--12 Abstract: Nanotechnology and its applications have captured a worldwide market. Nanomaterials that have been developed using this technology can be ncorporated into the devices so that renewable energy can be inverted or generated more efficiently. Nanomaterials have the potential to change the way we generate, deliver and use energy. Hydrogen cells are used in auto industry as a viable power source. Compressed hydrogen tanks are used to supply Hydrogen, and Oxygen is used from the air directly. There is no pollution caused by hydrogen fuel cell autos since the only emission is water. Organic dyes (dye sensitizers), which are sensitive to light, can absorb a broader range of the sun \& rsquo;s spectrum. A dye-sensitized solar cell has three primary parts. On top is a transparent anode made of fluoride-doped tin dioxide (SnO2:F) deposited on the back typically of a glass plate. On the back of this conductive plate is a thin layer of titanium dioxide (TiO2), which forms into a highly nanoporous structure with an extremely large surface-area. After soaking the film in the dye solution, a thin layer of the dye is left covalently bonded to the surface of the TiO2 . Computational material science and nanoscience can play many critical roles in renewable energy research. These include: finding the right materials for hydrogen storage; finding the most reliable and efficient catalyst for water dissociation in hydrogen production; finding a cheap, environmentally benign, and stable material for efficient solar cell applications; and understanding the photo-electron process in a nanosystem, and hence helping design efficient nanostructure solar cells. Keywords: Computational nanosciences, Dye solar cell, Hydrogen cell, Nanotechnology, Renewable energy, Sustainable energy Citedy By: A review on biomass-coal co-combustion: Current state of knowledge [PDF] Author: Munir, S. Journal: Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences,,Vol.47(4),2011--Pages265--287 Abstract: The concept of "Energy from biomass" gained attention in the last decade in the context of clean electricity generation. It is still a developing field because of the unavailability of standard engineering practices in this area. The variations in the chemical composition and physical properties of biomasses have made this task lengthier. There are several parametric studies available in the literature on the co-firing of biomass with coal. The information on agricultural residue co-firing in conjunction with air and fuel staging is scarce. The idea of energy crops for co-combustion to get green energy needs review due to present food shortage crises in the world. Therefore, there is utmost need to explore the energy potential and environmental benefits associated with the agricultural wastes-coal co-firing. The present paper presents a review of the previous work and suggests a strategy for Pakistan to solve energy crises by utilizing its indigenous resources of coal and agricultural waste. Keywords: Bagasse, Biomass, Climate change, Energy, Renewable Citedy By: Biogas development in rural areas of Pakistan: A sustainable option for domestic energy [PDF] Author: Khurshid, M. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.15(2),2011--Pages57--62 Abstract: All those developmental activities that meet the needs of the present generation without jeopardizing those of the future are sustainable in terms of social, economic and environmental parameters. Energy, a major agent of development, is mostly produced from fossil fuels that are not only finite and costly to extract but also contribute to polluting the environment. Renewable energy sources, on the other hand, offer environment-friendly and economically viable options for energy generation in the rural areas. Biogas offers an opportunity for decentralized energy-generation in rural areas to all those potential households possessing livestock. Rural communities traditionally use fuel-wood and cow-dung cakes as a source of energy in Pakistan. It has been reported that the annual per capita fuel-wood requirement is 0.52 m3 that implies a consumption of 5.20 m3 of fuel-wood for a family of 10 per year Thus, a single family may cut three to four fully grown trees in a year just to meet its domestic energy needs. Over the years, this has been leading to degradation of natural forests, besides depriving the agricultural fields from decomposed organic manure. Possessing a huge potential in the form of 10 million livestock for biogas development, Pakistan can produce 150 million m3 of biogas per day, i.e. 54,000 million m3 per annum. This huge untapped potential can prove to be a major source of income generation in rural areas through energy production, organic farming and trading carbon credits that could be earned under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the Kyoto Protocol, besides reducing emission of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. It would be advisable that the relevant policy-making organizations may work for devising a policy that encourages biogas development and promotion. One of the best ways to this end is to completely stop extension of natural gas pipelines to the rural areas in future and divert the cost of establishing such pipelines/networks to the development and promotion of biogas technology in rural areas of Pakistan. Keywords: Biogas development, CDM,Clean Development Mechanism, Domestic energy, Fossil fuels, Green houses gases, Rural areas Citedy By: How to make renewable energy economical for the people of Pakistan [PDF] Author: Khan, M. I. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.15(2),2011--Pages13--20 Abstract: Energy is the key to economic success of any country. Pakistan is heavily dependent on imported fossil-fuels for generating electricity from thermal power plants and for mobility of its transportation system. On the other hand, Pakistan is blessed with plenty of renewable energy resources, such as hydro, solar, wind and biomass. The country has one of the best systems of canal-irrigation, electricity transmission-grid and natural-gas distribution in the world. In spite of this, Pakistan is facing acute power-shortage. More than 58,000 villages are to-date without electricity. The gap between demand and supply in electricity is increasing by 10 \% every year and this gap in the demand and supply of natural gas is around 0.8Bcfd$\backslash$ , which will widen in the years to come. Using a combination of renewable energy sources within the existing infrastructure can be the best solution for eliminating this power short-fall in the country. Even in remote rural areas, where transmission-lines are not viable, decentralized power-generation using renewable energy technologies could prove to be the best sustainable solution. In this article, the use of Renewable Energy (RE) as a clean and sustainable source that provides a viable economic solution to the developing countries like Pakistan is highlighted. Keywords: Fossil fuel, Remote rural areas,Renewable energy Citedy By: Energy conservation strategies, with special reference to Pakistan [PDF] Author: Kazi, A. Q. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.15(2),2011--Pages1--8 Abstract: As a result of limited fossil-fuel resources, slow adoption and propagation of renewable energy technologies, spiraling prices of petroleum products and worsening environmental conditions, due to climate change, every country is faced with the need to define new directions with respect to energy consumption, conservation, and energy-options. These aspects are discussed in some detail in this article, which proposes that a multi-pronged strategy, encompassing (i) a change in overall life style, (ii) energy-efficient construction, distribution and utilization, (iii) effective environment-management and energy-discipline, be adopted to control and conserve energy in the increasing energy-demand scenario. Keywords: Climate change, Energy conservation, Fossil fuel, Renewable energy Citedy By: Efficient solar energy conversion in a low cost flat-plate solar cooker fabricated for use in rural areas of the South Asian countries [PDF] Author: Jamil, Y., Raza, M. and Muhammad, N. Journal: Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology,,Vol.27(2),2011--Pages193--198 Abstract: Solar flat plate cooker has been designed and fabricated for use in the rural areas of the South Asian countries. Indigenous low cost materials have been utilized for the fabrication of the cooker. The manufacturing cost of the cooker is less than US \$ 150. The aim of this work is td utilize direct solar energy for cooking purpose. A flat plate absorber made of Copper is used to absorb the heat energy from the sun. The maximum recorded plate temperature of the cooker was 110oC at an ambient temperature of 37oC. At this temperature sufficient steam is produced which is channeled to the cooking region though copper pipes. The cooker is found to be effective for cooking traditional food items like pulses, vegetables, meat, eggs, etc. It may be used as an alternative of fossil fuels in the rural areas of the South Asian countries, particularly by the rural women. Keywords: Cooking with Solar Energy, Energy Conversion, Flat-Plate Cooker, Solar Cooker, Solar Radiation Citedy By: Hydrogen fuel-cells: the future of clean energy technology [PDF] Author: Daud, W. R. W. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.15(2),2011--Pages41--48 Abstract: Fuel-cell technology, using hydrogen energy, is an advanced green energy technology for the future that is green, sustainable, clean and environment- friendly. Emission of Green-house gases from human activities has been proven beyond doubt as the main cause of global warming and climate-change. The finite world energy-supply, which consists nearly of 90 \% fossil fuel, will be depleted in a short period of time precipitating an energy-crisis because of a widening gap between fossil-fuel production and demand. Many countries responded to the anticipated energy crisis by diversifying their fuel-resources to include renewable and alternative energy, and developing green-energy technology for the future. Despite political announcements on renewable energy, fossil-fuels will continue to dominate energy resources for some time in future, and carbon emission will increase; but global nuclear energy expansion is uncertain because of international tensions and general public fears of another Chernobyl disaster or a nuclear attack by terrorists. Bio fuels too are plagued by the conflict between crops for fuel and crops for food, and there is a shift of interest towards crop-biomass waste. Further expansion of hydrogen energy is constrained by costs and by safety of hydrogen transport and storage. Fuel cell R \& D has shifted from older Alkaline Fuel Cell (AFC), Phosphoric Acid Fuel Cell (PAFC) and Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC), whose entry into the market was stalled by intractable operational and durability problems, to the more promising Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell (PEMFC), Direct Methanol Fuel Cell (DMFC) and Solid Oxid Fuel Cell (SOFC). A new type of fuel cell, the microbial fuel-cell (MFC), is also gaining attention because it provides a sustainable way of simultaneously reducing BOD \& COD of waste-water and providing power: combined wastewater treatment and power (CWTP).The main thrust in R \& D of PEMFC is cost-reduction of membrane and electro catalyst, by substitution with cheaper but more efficient organic/inorganic nanocomposite membranes and nano-inorganic electro catalyst, as well as lower electro catalyst loading, and by cost-reduction of bipolar plate by material reformulation with nanomaterials for injection or compression molding. In addition, cost-reduction can also be achieved by reduction of system complexity, using non-hydrated or self-hydrated membranes that eliminate water management sub-system and CO tolerant anodes that eliminate COremoval of reform ate hydrogen feed. PEMFC system efficiency can be further enhanced by better designing of flow field in bipolar plates, fuel and air manifold in the stack as well as through process-optimization using process system engineering tools. The main thrust of R \& D in SOFC is reduction of its operational temperature by replacement with low-temperature electrolytes, anodes and cathodes. Future DMFC R \& D focuses on methanol crossover reduction, better water-management and lower manufacturing costs. Future R \& D on MFC focuses on understanding the electron-transfer mechanism and redox reactions in cells and developing more efficient nanostructured electrodes and cell immobilization. The main thrusts of R \& D in production of hydrogen from liquid fuels are in the development of low-temperature auto-thermal steam reforming catalysts, purification of reformate hydrogen through pressure-swing adsorption and membrane processes, as well as membrane reactors, and higher hydrogen-storage capacity in carbon nanotubes and other nanostructures. The main focus of R \& D for sustainable hydrogen production is using photolysis of water into hydrogen and oxygen in solar photovoltaic-electrolyzer system, direct solar photoelectrochemical reactors and solar photo-biological fermentors. Keywords: Fuel cell, Green energy, Hydrogen economy, Hydrogen fuel cell, Nano materials, Nanostructures, Solar cell Citedy By: The Bangladesh micro-generation energy model: Lessons for developing countries [PDF] Author: Asif, M. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.15(2),2011--Pages41--48 Abstract: Lack of access to sufficient and affordable energy is one of the major challenges for a large population in the developing countries. Renewable energy is an appropriate option to meet the energy requirements of people in these regions. In this respect, many countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America hate initiated micro-generation renewable energy programmes. In Bangladesh, the renewable energy programmes based on micro-credit have experienced an unprecedented success. The Bangladesh model was pioneered by Grameen Shakti - the largest and most successful organization in the country - that is now installing over 20, 000 solar- home systems per month. Other developing countries can learn a lot from the best practices of the Bangladesh micro-generation model. By highlighting the prominent features of the Grameen Shakti programme, this article reflects upon the important lessons that can be learnt from the Bangladesh model, for launching similar programmes in other developing countries. Keywords: Grameen Shakti, Micro-generation, Renewable energy, Solar home systems Citedy By: Environmental issues and energy conservation in buildings in Pakistan: Role of architectural intervention [PDF] Author: Arif, S., Khan, A. and Alamgir, K Journal: Nucleus,Vol.48(2),2011--Pages137--142 Abstract: Energy shortage and environmental catastrophe is the severe problem globally and particularly important for the developing countries like Pakistan. There is a serious need to solve the problem for a sustainable building environment as the building sector has become a major consumer of energy. An attempt has been made for the building professionals and building users for adherence into their design and construction the energy conservation measures to reduce environmental problems more easily after the thorough review of the famous Authors \& rsquo; research work and findings in this field. The ultimate aim is the establishment of awareness for the building professionals for delivering sustainable buildings in Pakistan. Through the implementation of design measures to mitigate the urban heat island, the general public can decrease their demand for energy and effectively cool the urban landscape. In addition to the economic benefits, energy conservation leads to reductions in CO2 emissions Keywords: Buildings, Electricity, Energy conservation, Environment, Sustainability Citedy By: A study on economic feasibility of biogas plant for a small town [PDF] Author: Ansari, S. H., Khan, M. S., Haider, M. S. and Ahmad, A. Journal: Science International,,Vol.23(4),2011--Pages325--326 Abstract: Energy crisis is one of the major problems of our country now a day. We should emphasis on new energy resources to fulfill our demand. In renewable energy resources, biogas is one of them. Biogas is produced by anaerobic digestion of organic matters. In anaerobic digestion, biodegradable materials are decomposed into biogas by bacteria in the absence of air. Kitchen waste contain large amount of these biodegradable materials. The report of economic feasibility for biogas plant using kitchen waste of housing colony consisting of 200 houses for power generation and cooking purposes is carried out. Keywords: Anaeriobic digestion, Biogas, Kitchen waste Citedy By: Review of sustainable energy development [PDF] Author: Afgan, N. H. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.15(2),2011--Pages21--40 Abstract: This paper presents an overview of the sustainable energy development and aims to emphasize the important aspects of the relevant activity. A short introduction to the present energy outlook with a survey of available data is presented. Also, special attention has been given to the definition of sustainability and its generic meaning. In this respect, particular attention is given to the discussion on different aspects of sustainability in the present world scenario. In order to present an engineering approach to sustainable development, a review has been made of sustainability criteria as they are of importance to future energy-related products. The main emphasis of this paper is on reviewing the potential development in energy-engineering that may lead to sustainable energy development. Seven major areas having relevance to sustainable energy development and with specific problems are listed. These are: energy resources development; efficiency assessment; clean air technologies; information technologies; new and renewable energy resources; environment capacity; and mitigation of nuclear power threat to the environment. A sound education system is an important milestone for any nation to achieve economic development. In this respect, special focus was needed to consolidate the concepts of sustainable development education system. Distance-learning education system is envisaged as the potential option for dissemination of knowledge and information on new energy technologies. Keywords: Distance-learning education, Energy-engineering, Nuclear power threat, Renewable energy, Sustainable energy development Citedy By: Exploring the potential of solar and wind energy sources for irrigation: An overview for Pakistan [PDF] Author: Abdul, Wahab, Yasin, M. and Ahmed, M. M. Journal: Science Vision,,Vol.15(2),2011--Pages63--70 Abstract: Energy is one of the major concerns for pumping of water through tube wells, as it incurs high electricity tariffs and rising prices of diesel fuels. Cost effectiveness (Capital and O \& M) is essential for adopting solar and wind powered micro-irrigation for smallholdings. Solar and wind-energy systems could provide economical ways to produce electricity for domestic and farm use, as well as pumping water for agriculture. This paper presents an overview of the potential of solar and wind energy-resources, and explores means to better understand and adopt pumping technologies with renewable energy sources, in an agrarian country like Pakistan. Some details of system design and comparison of solar and wind-powered systems are given. Keywords: Agriculture, Energy, Pakistan, Solar, Tube well, Wind Citedy By: Face Challenges! To Secure Nation`s Energy Future (Development of Unconventional Reservoir). [PDF] Author: Zaghum Ur, Rehman and Tomic, J. Journal: Proceedings SPE-PAPG Annual Technical Conference,,Vol.0(0),2010--Pages283--288 Abstract: With depletion of conventional gas reservoirs around the world, paradigm has widely shifted for exploring unconventional gas. Though, unconventional gas production has been going on for quit some time in North America but is relatively new for rest of the world. In the opinion of geoscientists huge volumes of unconventional gas are still untapped. Finding \& development of these reserves would play vital role in the stability of E \& P business as well as economy of major nations. Various regions deal with their own classification of unconventional/tight reservoirs, however, generally accepted definition of tight reservoirs suggests, that sands having permeability of less than 0.1mD fall within tight sand. As Middle Indus Basin (MIB) is core operating area of OMV (Pakistan). Declining production from conventional gas pools demanded serious efforts for exploring new reserves. Pakistan a nation hungry in energy has a significant gas market. These factors triggered the initiation of comprehensive efforts to search for the unconventional gas. Therefore, OMV is putting substantial resources for understanding \& development of unconventional reservoirs in MIB. Full fledged study through consultant is currently underway for exploitation of unconventional gas reservoirs. Consultant will perform detailed study on drilling of tight reservoirs, petrophysical evaluation, geological depositional models, reservoir \& production engineering aspects of unconventional reservoirs. Based on the outcome of the study few, pilot wells will be drilled for testing \& proving the proposed technology. Keywords: Classification, Drilling, Energy, Gas production, Gas reservoir, Citedy By: Energy efficient security in MANETs: A comparison of cryptographic and artificial immune systems. [PDF] Author: Mazhar, N. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,,Vol.7(0),2011--Pages69--90 Abstract: MANET is characterized by a set of mobile nodes in an inherently insecure environment having limited battery capacities. Provisioning of energy efficient security in MANETs is, therefore, an open problem for which a number of solutions have been proposed. In this paper, the Author present an overview and comparison of the MANET security at routing layer by using the cryptographic and Artificial Immune System (AIS) approaches. The BeeAdHoc protocol, which is a Bio-inspired MANET routing protocol based on the foraging principles of honey bee colony, is taken as case study. the Author carry out an analysis of the three security frameworks that the Author have proposed earlier for securing BeeAdHoc protocol; one based on asymmetric key encryption, i.e BeeSee and the other two using the AIS approach, i.e BeeAIS based on self non-self discrimination from adaptive immune system and BeeAIS D-C based on Dendritic Cell (DC) behavior from innate immune system. the Author extensively evaluate the performance of the three protocols through network simulations in ns-2 and compare with BeeAdHoc, the base protocol, as well as with state of the art MANET routing protocols DSR and AODV. The results clearly indicate that AIS based systems provide security at much lower cost to energy as compared with the cryptographic systems. Moreover, the use of dendritic cells and danger signals instead of the classical self non-self discrimination allows to detect the non-self antigens with greater accuracy. Based on the results of this investigation, the Author also propose a composite AIS model for BeeAdHoc security by combining the concepts from both the adaptive and the innate immune systems by modeling the attributes and behavior of the B-cells and DCs Keywords: Artificial immune systems, Cryptography, Danger theory, MANET security Citedy By: Gas reservoir drive mechanism a comparative study of various diagnostic plots. [PDF] Author: Majeed, A., Aftab, F., Ahmed, M. N. and Akhtar, M. N. Journal: Proceedings SPE-PAPG Annual Technical Conference,Vol.0(0),2010--Pages199--208 Abstract: Production practices applied to maximize gas recovery from water drive gas reservoirs differ from those applied to volumetric ones. It necessitates appraising of reservoir drive mechanism at the earliest for maximum gas recovery. Normally P/Z, a diagnostic plot, is used to assess the drive type of a gas reservoir and estimate the Gas Initially in Place (GIIP). However, P/Z plot fails to recognize water encroachment during initial reservoir life for some reservoir-aquifer systems. There are some other diagnostic plots as well, such as energy plot, which are used to estimate GIIP and detect presence of aquifer attached with gas reservoirs. All these plots utilize correlations based on cumulative gas withdrawal and PVT properties evaluated at corresponding reservoir pressure. Pressure used to evaluate PVT properties is assumed to be acquired under complete stabilized conditions and representing reservoir depletion stage. However, in case of low permeability reservoirs it is not practical to shut-in wells long enough to achieve pressure stabilization. This paper presents comparative evaluation of these diagnostic plots for the above mentioned aspects of their application. 3-D homogenous gas reservoir simulation models are constructed to evaluate and identify the plot that detects presence of aquifer more efficiently with least gas withdrawal. Behavior of these plots for shut in times of varying duration is evaluated as well. Heterogeneous reservoir models are used to asses the effect of reservoir depositional heterogeneity, on the capability of these plots to diagnose drive mechanism and estimate GIIP. Keywords: Diagnostic plots, Drive mechanism, Energy, Gas reservoir, Permeability, Reservoirs, Simulation, Well Citedy By: Pakistan's potential in renewable energy resources. [PDF] Author: Khokhar, S. Journal: Environ Monitor,,Vol.10(42861),2011--Pages20--35 Abstract: Electrical power through renewable source of energy has been fast projected as an attractive option for Pakistan. Only 55 \% of the Pakistan's population has access to electricity and per capita supply is about 520 kWh. At present, the people are facing severe load shedding/blackout problems due to shortage of about 3 GW power supply. Gas and oil have 65 \% share in conventional electricity generation. Indigenous reserves of oil and gas are limited and the country heavily depends on imported oil. The oil import bill is a serious strain on the country's economy. Though there is huge coal potential in the country but has not been utilized due to various reasons. This shows that Pakistan must develop renewables to manage the energy crises. This paper analyses the prospects of renewables for managing the energy crises in the country. The study concludes that there is substantial potential of renewables in the country for managing the present energy crises as well as meeting the future energy needs. The need of electrification of entire Pakistan has become essential for our economic revival. Pakistan still accounts for only 0.5 per cent of the world's total energy consumption although energy consumption in our country has nearly tripled during the last 20 years or so. Keywords: Energy, Pakistan, Renewable energy Citedy By: Energy crisis in Pakistan: Analysis & solutions. [PDF] Author: Khan, M. S., Qayyum, M. A. and Saqib, H. E. Journal: New Horizons: Journal of the Institution of Electrical & Electronics Engineers Pakistan,,Vol.64(2),2010--Pages45--47 Abstract: The year is 2009 and Pakistan has fallen into the dark ages. This might be surprising point for someone unaware of the crisis facing by the country, but for all those staying in Pakistan can't see the light at the end of the tunnel because basically the Authors don't have the power to switch it on. As engineering students the Authors goal is to give ideas so that power sector can start rolling again. Keywords: Crisis, Dark ages, Engineering students, Power sector Citedy By: Meeting the Future Challenges of Energy Resources through Academia-Industry Collaboration. [PDF] Author: Khan, A. M. and Rafeeqi, S. F. A. Journal: Proceedings SPE-PAPG Annual Technical Conference,,Vol.0(0),2010--Pages295--302 Abstract: As the present century witnesses inter-disciplinary approach, mainly due to innovative technological development, the ever growing demand of energy requires more careful handling of energy and related human resources. Pakistan with rapid depleting oil \& gas reserves and an increased demand for energy, needs efficient management of available resources as well as efforts on war footing for new discoveries. The situation therefore demands more dedicated role of academia and the industry to face the future challenges. The academia must produce professionals that meet the requirement of the industry from local, regional and global perspective. The industry on the other hand needs to strengthen the efforts of the academia not only through financial support but also more effectively through technical support. A well qualified, practically trained human resource, oriented towards technological innovations, can revolutionize the present situation. NED University while assessing and analyzing the future challenges and responsibilities has been able to successfully design and implement an Academia- Industry collaborative model, for its newly established undergraduate Petroleum Engineering Programme. The model defines a strong support of industry through an Advisory Board for strengthening the programme and facilities to a level at par with the international standard. An effort has been made to produce a product that can contribute to the country and the global demand of the industry. The first batch of 25 students is now rendering efficient service to the industry. It is now up to the each perspective employer to judge the quality of students being produced. A win-win situation for both is anticipated. Keywords: Academia-industry collaboration, Energy, Energy resources, Well Citedy By: Physical model studies of energy dissipation systems to rehabilitate Jinnah barrage. [PDF] Author: Chaudhyr, Z. A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.5(0),2010--Pages32--38 Abstract: A subsidiary weir was proposed by feasibility consultants to rehabilitate and modernize jinnah Barrage. This weir is to be constructed across the river, at a distance of about 800 ft, downstream of the barrage. Subsidiary weir location and crest level was finally fixed on the basis of a detailed physical model study. This model study was carried by Irrigation Research institute (IRI) at their Lahore Laboratory under the technical guidance of feasibility consultants. The Detailed Design Consultants while finalizing rehabilitation structure (either subsidiary weir or its alternative) requested IRI for another model study, which was carried out at Nandipur Research Station. It seems that the two model studies were under taken for the same project, having almost similar objectives. This paper critically reviews the judiciousness of two model studies carried out for the same project. Furthermore, the experimental results of various rehabilitation alternatives are also discussed in terms of their reliability and effectiveness. Keywords: Jinnah barrage, Physical model study, Rehabilitation, Subsidiary weir, Two-step stilling basin, modernization Citedy By: Energy dissipation problems downstream of Jinnah barrage. [PDF] Author: Chaudhry, Z. A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences, ,Vol.3(0),2010--Pages19--25 Abstract: Jinnah barrage is one of these barrages recommended by the Evaluation Consultants for rehabilitation and modernization works. Feasibility study for Rehabilitation and Modernization of the Jinnah Barrage noted that the hydraulic jump do not form over the glacis rather sweeps on the floor. The un-dissipated energy is causing damage to the impact blocks, the adjacent concrete floor and downstream loose stone apron. Feasibility consultants suggested curative measures, such as the construction of subsidiary weir at a distance of about 800ft downstream of the barrage and river training works upstream of the barrage. The finalization of rehabilitation works (either subsidiary weir or its alternative) is in progress and subsequently the detail design of the selected alternative will be carried out. The main focus in this study is to review previous studies/investigations, energy dissipation mechanism, river survey, sounding and probing data to establish the extent of damages and precisely the root cause for the damages. Keywords: Jinnah barrage, Rehabilitation, Subsidiary weir, modernization Citedy By: Development of a solar fish dryer. [PDF] Author: Boyo, A. and Boyo, H. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research, ,Vol.52(4),2010--Pages228--230 Abstract: The solar fish dyer developed for particular conditions of Bishop Village, Lagos, Nigeria absorbs sunlight with a flat plate collector for its air heater. Mirrors are appended to one of the collector sides to enhance collection of solar radiations. The dryer is a passive type, tailored to solve the energy needs of the people of the area. On days of high irradiance, temperature within the solar fish dryer can be as high as 800C with relative humidity around 10 \% . Keywords: Fish drying, Flat plate collector, Renewable energy, Solar fish dryer Citedy By: Distribution of total and diffuse solar radiation at Lahore, Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Ahmed, M. A., Ahmed, F. and Akhtar, W. Journal: Journal of Scientific Research, ,Vol.40(1),2010--Pages37--43 Abstract: In this research work the solar radiation for Lahore (Latitude 31.56) has been studied for efficient utilization of solar energy employing sunshine hour data. The results obtained exhibit the variation of direct and diffuse radiation at Lahore. The diffuse radiation is maximum in the month of July and minimum during the month of April, May and June. The K1 Value indicates the clear sky during the month of January, February, April, May and September to December. Where as during the month of June to August the sky is mostly cloudy which is the monsoon months is. From the estimated results it is found that with the exception of monsoon months solar energy can be utilized very efficiently through out the year. Keywords: Diffuse radiation, Sky condition, Solar radiation Citedy By: Use of solar energy for disinfection of polluted water. [PDF] Author: Jamil, Y., Ahmad, M. R., Ali, K., Habeeb, A. and Hassan, M. Journal: Soil & Environment,,Vol.28(1),2009--Pages13--16 Abstract: Polluted water is causing serious health problems especially in the rural areas of Pakistan. People have limited access to safe water supply and many diseases like diarrhea and gastrointestinal diseases are transmitted by consumption of polluted water. We have investigated the potential of using solar energy to pasteurize water. Low cost indigenously available materials have been utilized to design and fabricate a solar box type pasteurizer having a capacity of three liters. The performance study of the pasteurizer was performed during the month of May 2008. The designed pasteurizer maintained water temperature in the range of 60 oC to 70 oC continuously for more than an hour which is enough for deactivation of coliform bacteria. The maximum water temperature on a clear sunny day was found to be 67 oC, corresponding to an ambient temperature of 40 oC. With the pasteurizer facing south, a very little repositioning was required. The low cost and operational simplicity of the pasteurizer make it affordable and usable. It is more useful in rural areas where other sources of energy like electricity and gas are not easily available. Keywords: solar Energy, polluted water, Environmental Health Citedy By: Challenges and opportunities for wind power for future energy supplies in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Farooque, M., Javed, M. T., Khan, N. A. and Waheed, K. Journal: Nucleus,,Vol.46(3),2009--Pages253--262 Abstract: Due to rapid modernization the energy resources are depleting rapidly throughout the world while the energy demand is rising steadily. The crude oil price has soared upto \$ 140.0 per barrel that has triggered the use of renewable energy resources. Pakistan particular is the most energy deficient country where a shortfall of as high as 4500 MW is recorded in the recent year. The Renewable Energy Technologies (RET's) are important and had gained the prime importance these days with specific focus on solar and wind power. This paper highlights the challenges and opportunities for wind power in Pakistan. The wind potential in different areas has been explored, including a vital area of about 9700 km2 in Sindh. Wind power is a new energy resource in Pakistan's history, uptil now main resources are Fossil Fuel contributing 65 \% , hydel 33 % and nuclear only 2 \% respectively. Wind is an environment friendly resource and its appreciable contribution will be achieved in future. Paper analyses the present energy scenario through wind power in Pakistan and leads to future progress in order to secure energy security in the country. Keywords: wind power, future energy supplies, renewable energy resources ,Pakistan Citedy By: Solar drying system for the agro-products dehydration. [PDF] Author: Castaeda-Miranda, A., Castaeda-Miranda, R. and Jimenez, J. M. Journal: Journal of Agriculture and Social Sciences,,Vol.4(4),2009--Pages135--140 Abstract: The proposed solar thermodynamic drying system reduces the traditional dehydration process of Roselle used in the western region of Mexico, from approximately four days to four hours. In addition to the 95 \% reduction in process time, this system also maintains the Roselle's nutritional content, especially that of ascorbic acid (Vitamin C). The proposed drying system is based on current operating conditions in Colima, Mexico as well as on three quantifiable control variables of Roselle: product weight, product humidity and product drying temperature. The product control variables were quantified and defined during the project as: Initial weight (1.0 kg of fresh product), final weight (0.152 kg of dry solid), initial humidity (84.8 \% ), final humidity (14.3 \% ) and dry temperature (48 \textordmasculine C to 68 \textordmasculine C). Based on these control variables, the proposed system operates a continuously moving band at a constant speed. As the Roselle moves along the band through the system's drying chamber, it is dehydrated by heated air. Initially, the system uses solar energy to heat fluid (i.e., water or thermal oil). The heat generated is transferred from fluid to surrounding air via a forced convection process. By greatly diminishing drying time and controlling humidity, the system affords considerable control over optimal end-product quality (i.e., protection from pollutants \& destructive microbial activity). The proposed system's settings can be easily adjusted to accommodate other products as well, making it even more commercially viable for agro-industrial producers. The drying process eliminates the water or moisture content of the calyxes yet maintains the nutritional properties specifically, the ascorbic acid content. A low cost and durability of the system is considered in the design. Keywords: Solar drying, agro-products, dehydration, Citedy By: Estimation of global and diffuse solar radiation for Hyderabad, Sindh, Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Ahmed, M. A., Ahmad, F. and Akhtar, M. W. Journal: Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences,,Vol.5(2),2009--Pages73--77 Abstract: Solar radiation studies have been carried out to asses the feasibility of solar Energy utilization at Hyderabad, Sindh, Pakistan (Latitude 25o 35 N). The result obtained shows they variation of Direct and Diffuse component of solar radiation in summer and winter months. The contribution of diffuse solar radiation is high during the monsoon months (July and August) whereas sky condition are clear during winter months. From the estimated values it is found that with the exception of monsoon month, solar energy can be utilized very efficiently throughout the year. Keywords: solar radiation, solar energy, Hyderabad, Pakistan Citedy By: Application of various means for energy conservation. [PDF] Author: Qureshi, S. A., Kamran, M. and Mahmood, F. Journal: New Horizons: Journal of the Institution of Electrical & Electronics Engineers Pakistan,,Vol.59(0),2009--Pages22-28 Abstract: This paper includes the application of different technologies to reduce the cost of electricity by TOD Tariff of WAPDA and MDI controllers. The power factor improvement by supply of KVAR not only improves the power quality but also reduce the per unit cost of electric. Keywords: Energy conservation. Citedy By: Developing cost effective and environmental friendly oil transmission network. [PDF] Author: Qureshi, M. A., Ahmad, M. and Aziz, E. A. Journal: Proceedings SPE-PAPG Annual Technical Conference,,Vol.0(0),2008--Pages191--194 Abstract: Country's gross crude oil production is nearing 70,000 barrel per day which includes OGDCL's current share around 45,000 barrels per day. This volume on daily basis is mostly being transported by roads through oil tankers from different fields to the refineries. On the other hand, about 850 Kilometers long pipelines from Karachi to Multan, 365 Kilometers white line in central region from Mehmud Kot to Sheikhupura and in up-country more than 100 Kilometers plus oil pipelines from Khaur to Morgah Rawalpinid are also being used for shifting imported and local crude oil to the refineries. The total oil transportation expenses of oil producers are over Rupees one billion or US \$ 16 Million during 2005-06. Considerable number of tankers are required for shifting of crude oil to the refineries. The conditions of the roads, such as Karachi to Hyderabad, have worsened due to this heavy load and the frequency of transportation. Traffic congestion, fatal road accidents, environmental pollution and shortage of parking space in industrial areas are the other burning issues related to oil transportation. We would like to take this opportunity to present some thought provoking alternate proposal regarding launching and Oil Transport Company for crude oil transportation through pipelines to the different refineries. Being a capital intensive project, the investment both in local and foreign currency can be syndicated through a commercial consortium of major E \& P and refining companies. Oil Companies and refining sector would find this opportunity attractive both from the investment and operational perspectives. In the initial stage it will be advantageous to start a venture with some equity allocation and focus on developing limited pipelines in the southern region of the county. The additional benefits would be savings in foreign exchange by reduced diesel import bill for tankers, lower number of road accidents, clean environment, lower cost and improvement in infrastructure that will make energy sector more conducive to foreign investors. Keywords: environmental friendly, oil transmission Citedy By: Future of Solar Energy in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Orfi, S. D., Baig, A. and Sarwar, A. Journal: Engineering horizons,Vol.21(236),2008--Pages21--23 Abstract: There is plenty of sun shine in most of the areas in Pakistan with 270-300 shining days a year and 7-8 shining hours a day. There is also plenty of sand with average to good silicon contents (20-25 \% ) easily available in many areas of the country. The technical base and government subsidy required for the Solar Energy to take off are missing. Essential inputs required for a meaningful programme on Solar Energy (20MV/year) are described. Once, the solar energy harnessing programme based on local silicon whether in private sector or government sector touches 100 MV/year, subsidies provided by government can be slowly withdrawn as was done by Japan. Keywords: Solar Energy, Pakistan, Citedy By: Performance optimization of industrial municipal solid waste combustors A need of the day to convert waste to wealth. [PDF] Author: Mubin, S., Khan, A. H. and Hussain, A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Science,Vol.60(42737),2008--Pages19--25 Abstract: The average amount of municipal solid waste (MSW) generated in Malaysia is 0.5-0.8 kg/person/day and has increased to 1.7 kg/person/day in major cities. Due to rapid development and lack of space for new landfills, big cities in Malaysia are now switching to incineration. However, a major public concern over this technology also is the perception of the emission of pollutants of any form. Design requirements of high-performance incinerators are sometimes summarized as the achievements of 3Ts (time, temperature and turbulence). An adequate retention time in hot environment is crucial to destroy the products of incomplete combustion and organic pollutants. Also turbulent mixing enhances uniform distributions of temperature and oxygen availability. CFD modeling is now in the development phase of becoming a useful tool for 3D modeling of the complex geometry and flow conditions in incinerators. However, CFD flow simulations can enable detailed parametric variations of design variables. CFD modeling of an industrial scale MSW incinerator was done using software FLUENT Ver. 6.1. The 3D modeling was based conversation equations for mass, momentum and energy. The differential equations were discertized by the Finite Volume Method and were solved by the SIMPLE algorithm. The k-turbulence model was employed. The meshing was done using Gambit 2.0. The cold flow simulations were performed initially to develop the flow and velocity field. Using FLIC and FLUENT, it was possible to simulate all the three main phases of combustion i.e., the drying zone, devolatilization zone and the char burnout zone. Numerical simulations of the flow field inside the primary and secondary combustion chambers provided the temperature profiles and the concentration data at the nodal points of computational grids. The maximum temperature in the primary combustors for MSW and Mix fuel combustion were around 1600 K and 1900 K respectively. Parametric study was also done to minimize the NOX emission. Nevertheless, the reactive flow modeling inside a MSW combustor has been done successfully using the FLIC and FLUENT programs. The results are useful in optimizing the design and operation of industrial waste combustors. Keywords: industrial wates, muncipaql solid wastes, combustion, combustors Citedy By: Benefits and constraints in the use of solar cooker. [PDF] Author: Ilyas, S. Z. Journal: Science International,Vol.20(2),2008--Pages155--157 Abstract: Women in Pakistan have been overlooked during and after the planning and implementation of household energy projects for decades. The immediate impact of domestic household energy projects falls on the women first. Since women are the ones who deal mostly with energy at the domestic level. A sample of 100 women users of solar cookers was selected randomly. Majority of the respondents were in the age group of 30-55 years (80 \% ) and possessed solar cooker for more than on e year (74 \% ). Nutritional aspects (preserving nutritive value and food flavors), environmental aspect (keeping environment clean), and economical aspects (saving fuel and money) were perceived as most beneficial. Personal benefits (saving of time and convenience) ranked low under benefits. Situational constraints, like no cooking after evening and seasonal use of the cooker were perceived as sever constraints, followed by technical constraints (device not being durable) and personal constraints (shifting of device). The paper also highlights the modifications desired in the design of the solar cooker. Keywords: Solar Cookers, women, Pakistan, modifications in design Citedy By: Prospects of renewable-energy sources in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Zaigham, N. A. and Nayyer, Z. A. Journal: Proceedings Renewable Energy Technologies and Sustainable Development,Vol.4(0),2007--Pages65--86 Abstract: Pakistan, despite the enormous potential of its energy resources, remains energy- deficient and has to rely heavily on imports to satisfy its needs. Moreover, a very large part of the rural areas does not have the electrification facilities, because they are either too remote and/or too expensive to connect to the national grid. Pakistan obtains its energy- requirements from a variety of traditional and commercial sources. Share of various primary energy-sources in energy-supply mix remained during last few years as oil: 43.5 \% , gas: 41.5 \% , LPG: 0.3 \% , coal: 4.5 \% , hydro-electricity: 9.2 \% , and nuclear electricity: 1.1 \% . The electric-power generation included 71.9 \% thermal, 25.2 \% hydel and 2.9 \% nuclear. While there is no prospect for Pakistan to reach self-sufficiency in hydrocarbons, a good option is the exploitation and utilization o f the huge coal-reserves of Thar and the other renewable energy sources. Pakistan has wide spectrum of high potential renewable energy sources, conventional as well as non-conventional, which have not been adequately explored, exploited and developed. Thus, the primary energy supplies today are not enough to meet even the present demand. So, Pakistan, like other developing countries of the region, is facing a serious challenge of energy deficit. The development of the renewable energy sources can play an important role in meeting this challenge. Present observations, based oil reviewing the geological setup, geographical position, climatological cycles and the agricultural/industrial/ urbanization activities, reveal that there are bright prospects for the exploitation of various renewable-energy sources, which include mega \& macro/micro-hydel, biomass, biogas, wind, solar, co-generation, city and other solid wastes, utilization of low-head canal levels, sea wave \& tide and geothermal energies etc. Technologically, all these renewable-energy sources are viable and consequently suited to efforts for poverty alleviation and cleaner environment in Pakistan. The country can be benefited by harnessing these options o f energy-generation as substitute energy in areas where sources exist. As Pakistan is an agricultural country and major part of its population lives in the rural areas, the electricity generated by renewable sources will also improve rural life, thereby reducing the urban migration that is taxing the ability of cities to cope with their own environmental problems. Keywords: renewable-energy sources, Pakistan, Citedy By: Development of alternative/renewable sources of energy in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Sharif, M. Journal: Proceedings Renewable Energy Technologies and Sustainable Development,Vol.4(0),2007--Pages87--96 Abstract: The depleting Conventional Energy Resources and highly raised prices of fuel oil, coal, firewood and such other fossil fuels, have forced the mankind to think about the utilization of Alternative/Renewable Sources of Energy. Alternative/ Renewable Energy is very attractive, reliable and cost competitive energy. Sun is readily available to provide a clean, abundant and virtually infinite energy to meet the significant portion of mankind`s energy-needs. The possible use of renewable-energy sources is discussed in this paper, in order to fill the estimated gap between the available energy-sources and energy-needs of our country in the near future. Designing, Fabrication and Installation of different renewable-energy devices by PCSIR are also discussed in this paper. Different renewable-energy devices such as, solar water-heaters, solar cookers, solar dehydrators, solar water-desalination plants, solar heating and cooling of buildings, solar operated absorption-type chiller, solar furnace, solar architecture, developed by PCSIR are discussed in some detail so that the role of renewable-energy sources for their direct use (as heat and power) call be determined. Various technical aspects are discussed to reduce the unit cost with improved efficiency. Keywords: renewable-energy sources, Pakistan, renewable-energy devices, solar water-heaters, solar cookers, solar dehydrators, solar water-desalination plants, Citedy By: An overview of biofuels [PDF] Author: Qureshi, I. H. and Ahmad, S. Journal: Nucleus,Vol.44(42737),2007--Pages45--54 Abstract: Biofuels for transport have received considerable attention due to rising oil prices and growing concern about greenhouse gas emissions. Biofuels namely ethanol and esters of fatty acids have the potential to displace a substantial amount of petroleum fuel in the next few decades which will help to conserve fossil fuel resources. Life cycle analyses show that biofuels release lesser amount of greenhouse gases and other air pollutants. Thus biofuels are seen as a pragmatic step towards reducing carbon dioxide emission from transport sector. Biofuels are compatible with petroleum and combustion engines can easily operate with 10 \% ethanol and 20 \% biodiesel blended fuel with no modification. However higher concentrations require flex-fuel engines which automatically adjust fuel injection depending upon fuel mix. Biofuels are derived from renewable biomass and can be produced from variety of feedstocks. The only limiting factors are the availability of cropland, growth of plants and the climate. Countries with warmer climate can get about five times more biofuel crops from each acre of land than cold climate countries. Genetically modified crops and fast growing trees are being developed to increase the production of energy crops. Keywords: Biofuels, ethanol and esters Citedy By: The recovery of natural gas from municipal solid waste of Faisalabad (Pakistan). [PDF] Author: Nawaz, Z., Naveed, S. and Sagheer, K. Journal: Science International,Vol.18(1),2007--Pages21--26 Abstract: The natural gas (CH4) emission from landfills, otherwise emitted to the atmosphere can be remove and utilized, or significantly reduced in quantity by using cost-effective management methods. The gas can also be used as residential, commercial, or industrial fuel. Therefore, emission reduction strategies have the potential to become low cost, or even profitable. The growth rate of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) output in Faisalabad is 4.97 \% ; city and towns are developing quickly with high population rate and industrial development. MSW output was only 9732 Mt/day in 2001 and increased to 12065 Mt/day in 2004. Therefore the recovery of natural gas (CH4) from landfills is a profitable project in Faisalabad. For the progressive country like Pakistan, it is obligatory that all energy options must be pursued vigorously including methane (CH4) emission from landfills of MSW of Faisalabad. Keywords: natural gas, from municipal solid waste, Faisalabad, Pakistan. Citedy By: Electrification of remote coastal areas through wind-energy. [PDF] Author: Majid Ul, Hassan Journal: Proceedings Renewable Energy Technologies and Sustainable Development,Vol.4(0),2007--Pages: 39--47 Abstract: It has been estimated that with the present utilization o f resources, the country will run out o f oil and gas reserves in one and a half decade. There is, thus, a strong need to take measures to tap other resources of energy, which are abundantly available in Pakistan. The exploitation of these resources for production of electricity on local basis, under participatory system of development, would supplement energy being provided by WAPDA, at a much lower cost due to the avoidance of laying high-tension cables, transformers, and meters, etc., and the manpower required to maintain the system. Balochistan is a large but thinly populated province of Pakistan. The situation of electrification in Balochistan is serious, as a vast majority of the population is without access to electricity. Many villages and districts of Balochistan do not have centralized electricity-grid and there is no hope, in the near future, to have one because the extension of grid to such remote and scattered settlements is neither practical not- economically viable. In Balochistan, out of a total number of 13,700 villages, WAPDA has merely electrified 3,154 villages due to the high cost involved in developing the necessary infrastructure. Not surprisingly, this situation is a source of discontentment among the people of the Province. Pakistan has a considerable potential of wind-energy in the coastal belt of Balochistan and Sindh, as well as in the desert areas of Punjab and Sindh, which if utilized effectively, can not only electrify all remote coastal villages, but the electricity so produced also can be fed to the national grid. This renewable source of energy has however, so far, not been utilized. Recently, fourteen small wind-turbines (300-500 watts) were procured and installed by PCRET under Sino-Pak S \& T Protocol. Being encouraged by performance of these small wind- turbines, a further 120 wind-turbines (100 of 500 watts and 20 wind-turbines of 5kW each) are being installed. The small wind-turbines of 500 watts have been imported from China and that of 5kW from Spain. Efforts are also being made to initiate local manufacturing of 500 watts wind-turbines under ToT from China and (5-10) kW wind- turbines under ToT from some European countries. Keywords: Electrification of remote coastal areas, wind-energy, Balochistan, Sindh, Pakistan, Citedy By: Nanotechnology and clean energy. [PDF] Author: Hasibullah Journal: Proceedings Conference on Nano-Science and Technology in Pakistan,Vol.0(0),2007--Pages16-22 Abstract: Nanotechnology is rapidly passing through the transition phase of development with active participation of industrially advanced and several developing countries. The basic advantage associated with nanotechnology of enabling the scientists to manipulate the matter at individual atomic and molecular level, presents unlimited avenues for progress in a wide range of industrial and commercial areas like computers, medicine, construction material, energy and environment. Clean energy is the major requirement of sustainable socio-economic development linked to international commitments made by the world community in Rio, Kyoto and Johannesburg during the last few decades. Fossil fuel energy production cannot be abolished entirely but can be significantly diminished by replacements with renewable energy. Nanotechnology can play a substantial role in augmenting the potential of photovoltaic, hydrogen economy, cleaner industrial production and in nuclear power generation through the creation and use of better nanostructured materials. The promising future of nanotechnology can simply be envisaged by unprecedent amount of funding being allocated to its research and development throughout the world both in the private and public domain. It is the right moment for the developing countries to participate in the world efforts to draw benefit from this wonderful technology. Keywords: Nanotechnology, clean energy, nuclear power Citedy By: Potential market-size for renewables in the residential sector of Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Athar, G. R. and Imtiaz, M. Journal: Proceedings Renewable Energy Technologies and Sustainable Development,Vol.4(0),2007--Pages97--108 Abstract: Renewable energy-sources can be used for meeting the energy-demand of various end uses, like water-pumping for irrigation, process-heat for industries and desalination for potable water-supplies. However, the residential sector has the largest potential for renewable energy usage among all sectors of the economy. At present, the residential sector of Pakistan consumes some 26 million Tonne of Oil Equivalent (c/TOE) energy: with more than 6 MTOE in the form of commercial energy (electricity, natural gas, kerosene, LPG and coal) and about 20 MTOE in the form of non-commercial energy (wood, dung and crop- residues). Applied Systems Analysis Group (ASAG) has carried out a study to project the energy demand of Pakistan up to the year 2024-25, using an energy-demand model MAED. This model uses simulation technique to evaluate the energy-demand implications of a scenario, describing the assumed evolution of demographic parameters, economic activities, lifestyle of the population and technological improvements. The demographic targets of the Population-Policy of Pakistan and economic targets of Government of Pakistan have been adopted as the basis of our reference scenario. The study shows that the energy-demand of the residential sector will increase by a factor of 1.7, compared to the base- year2001-2002. The residential sector will need 41.9 MTOE energy, of which: (i) 5.9 MTOE (72.5 Twh) in the form of electricity to fulfill the energy-needs for lighting, cooling and other electric appliances, (ii) 24.4 MTOE for cooking, (iii) 5.7 MTOE for water heating, and (iv) 5.8 MTOE for space heating. In all these end-uses, renewable energy can make a contribution depending on the cost of energy, convenience of use and reliability of supply. Although, the government is vigorously pursing a rural electrification program, a portion of residential sector, particularly in remote areas, will not be electrified even by 2024-25. The non-electrified houses will require 3 to 5 TIM of electricity, by the year 2024-25, which can be supplied through renewables, depending upon resource endowment of the area. Theoretically, all the thermal energy-needs of residential sector for cooking, water heating and space heating can be met by renewable. However, natural gas, followed by LPG and kerosene, according to availability of fuels and affordability by consumers, are preferred fuels for thermal uses. These commercial fuels can meet only 11 MTOE of thermal energy-requirements for cooking, water heating and space heating. The resultant shortfall of about 25 MTOE, by year 2024-25, will be a potential market for renewable-energy sources in addition to the renewable-electricity market of 3 to 5 Twh. Keywords: renewable, residential areas, Pakistan. Citedy By: Analysis of economics of investment in a wind-farm system. [PDF] Author: Ali, F. and Nayyar, A. H. Journal: Proceedings Renewable Energy Technologies and Sustainable Development,Vol.4(0),2007--Pages7--20 Abstract: With the constant increase in the cost of generating electricity through conventional means, there is a growing need to look for other sources of energy. Renewable energy resources with their zero-emission features provide us with a good alternative. Of all the renewable energy resources, wind has proved to be the most promising one, chiefly due to its cost effectiveness and ability to provide grid-quality power. In Pakistan, the concept of using renewable energy for power generation is not new. However, the lack of support from the Government proved to be a major hurdle in developing Renewable Energy resources. Nevertheless, only recently the Government of Pakistan has taken concrete steps to develop renewable energy resources, one of which is a wind-mapping/charting program being carried out in the coastal areas of Balauchistan and Sindh. The wind-mapping program would eventually determine the wind-power potential of Pakistan and sizes of the wind-farm systems to be set up here. This study aims to estimate the cost of generating electricity using wind-energy and a suitable tariff-rate that may be set to attract foreign/local investment in this sector. This study also lays out policy recommendations that may help to attract investment to develop wind farm systems. Keywords: Renewable energy , wind-farm, Economics, Pakistan Citedy By: Challenges for the promotion of renewable-energy technologies in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Akhter, P. Journal: Proceedings Renewable Energy Technologies and Sustainable Development,Vol.4(0),2007--Pages143--150 Abstract: This paper emphasized on the importance and challenges for the promotion of SET in Pakistan. 75 \% of the energy is supplied by the fossil-fuels and 13 \% of energy needs are meet by biomass. The fossil-fuel for the use o f energy has harmful impacts or effect on the environment in many ways. The magnitude of Renewable-Energy Sources (RES) is enormous, and the energy gap can be filled by promoting these RES. Pakistan is an energy-deficient country and these RES call be utilized to meet the challenges of energy deficit. But these energy technologies are unable to compete with conventional energy sources in open-market and are facing number of challenges. Keywords: Renewable-energy technologies, challenges, Pakistan. Citedy By: Energy conservation for self-reliance. [PDF] Author: Zubair, K. M. Journal: Engineering Horizons,Vol.28(204),2005--Pages24--25 Abstract: Economic growth and energy autarky are inexorably linked. It may be naive to think that we can rid ourselves from the deep economic malaise without access to reliable energy supply systems at affordable costs. Pakistan is endowed with unlimited natural resources. Yet despite fifty years of our existence the goal of energy self-dependence is far cry. We are heavily oil-dependent and spend more than two billion US dollars on oil importation annually. Oil constitutes about 43 percent of the total primary energy supplies and around 48 percent of the net energy consumption by source. Less than 20 percent of oil supplies are based on indigenous production. These reserves will not last even two years if we were to meet all our oil-requirements through indigenous production. Similarly, the demand of natural gas, the largest indigenously available source of commercial energy, far exceeds the supply and at the current production level, the balance recoverable gas reserves may dry up in a little less than 15 years. It indeed is a national malady that the abundantly available indigenous resources of hydro and coal energy remain largely untapped for one reason or the other. Keywords: Energy conservation, self-reliance, Economic growth Citedy By: Oil consumption trends and demand projections for Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Uqaili, M. A., Memon, M. D. and Harijan, K. Journal: Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology,Vol.24(3),2005--Pages243--250 Abstract: Pakistan is an energy deficit county. Oil is the major commercial energy source in the country. Indigenous reserves of oil are limited and the country is heavily dependent on the import of oil. The oil import bill is a serious strain on the country's economy. With the growing economic development and with efforts to provide enhanced access to commercial energy, the oil demand in the country is expected to grow rapidly. This paper presents the oil consumption trends and future demand projections for Pakistan. The study indicates that the oil consumption in the country increased rapidly at an average growth rate of about 5.8 \% per annum during the last three decades. The major consumers of the oil in the country are transport, power and industrial sectors. The paper concludes that the oil demand in the county is projected to increase to about 32-47 MTOE (Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent) by the years 2018. Enhancement in the indigenous exploration and production of oil and substitution with other indigenous energy resources is essential for meeting the growing oil demand and increasing economic independence in the county. Keywords: Oil consumption trends, oil demand, commercial energy source , Pakistan Citedy By: Potential, utilization and demand projections of coal in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Uqaili,M.A., Memon, M. D. and Harijan, K. Journal: Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology,Vol.24(1),2005--Pages63--70 Abstract: Energy is the most important input for economic development and national prosperity. Pakistan is an energy deficient country. Large portion of the population has no access to commercial energy. The commercial energy is dominated by gas followed by oil, hydel and nuclear energy. The indigenous reserves of oil and gas are limited and the country is heavily dependent on the import of oil. With the economic development and with efforts to provide enhanced access to commercial energy, the energy demand in the country in expected to grow rapidly. This requires development of indigenous energy sources and coal is one of the viable options. This paper presents the potential, utilization and demand projections of coal in Pakistan. The study indicates that the resource potential of coals is about 185 billion tones in the country. The share of coal in primary commercial energy consumption at the time of country's independence was about 60 \% but with the introduction of oil as cleaner and conveniently transportable fuel and the discovery of natural gas reserves, the utilization has gradually reduced. Currently, the coal contributes about 5.4 \% of the total primary commercial energy consumption in the country. The paper concludes that the coal demand in the country will increase to about 7-10 MTOE (Million tones of Oil Equivalent) by the year 2018. Development of indigenous coal with advanced technologies is essential for meeting the growing energy demand in Pakistan. Keywords: coal demand, Coal utilization, economic development Pakistan Citedy By: Energy conservation some aspects. [PDF] Author: Rizvi, I. Journal: Engineering horizons,Vol.18(203),2005--Pages15--19 Abstract: The pressure to reduce investment and operating costs is a constant factor for the application of new and challenging technologies, the present crisis of Sugar industry has further necessitated the adoption of policies for reduction in production cost. Efficient utilization of energy can contribute in substantial reduction of production cost. This article describes the procedures that can be adopted in this regard right from cane yard up to bagging of sugar .Impact of good guilty cane, improvement in calorific value of bagasse, energy conservation in boiling house, efficient utilization of electricity and steam are briefly discussed. Keywords: Energy conservation, utilization of electricity, Citedy By: Analysis and design of WAPDA distribution system to minimize interruptions in power supply to U.E.T. [PDF] Author: Qureshi, S. A., Kamran, M., Ali, A. and Raza, M. T. Journal: Journal of the Institution of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Pakistan,Vol.46(1),2005--Pages36--41 Abstract: Due to unscheduled power shut downs and momentary tripping, working of University of Engineering \& Technology (U.E.T) Lahore Pakistan, is suffering badly. UET has produced eminent Engineers who have left their mark in various engineering disciplines, at international level and has the unique honor of being one of the earlier engineering institutions in the sub continent. The UET is known worldwide and dignitaries visit this place of learning through out the year. The university has more than eighteen independent departments covering all the discipline in under graduate and postgraduates levels. Computers are installed in almost all the departments, particularly after the application of information technology in almost all the field of studies. Any interruption in the supply of electricity causes unacceptable inconvenience which is loss of man hours and bad name to this highly respected place of learning. Hence, it has become the need of present time for analyzing the existing distribution system of UET and suggests the remedial measure to design a reliable supply system. Significant big industrial consumers has switched over to self generation. Along with other reasons, one of the major reasons, for their switching away from WAPDA system is the unscheduled power interruptions and momentary tripping. As a result today WAPDA is facing a surplus power, whereas surplus power is directly contributing to high energy cost (effecting the Pakistan economy negatively) and WAPDA is in financial deficits of billion of rupees Keywords: power shut downs, Electricity distribution system Citedy By: Nuclear knowledge management and preservation: a case study of Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Khan, S. Riaz Journal: Nucleus,Vol.42(42737),2005--Pages145--149 Abstract: The nuclear knowledge management (NKM) has become a major growing issue in the IAEA's Agenda. The use of nuclear technology in variety of application related to sustainable development, demands the preservation of nuclear knowledge. In developing countries the use of nuclear technology is much smaller compared to developed world. The nuclear knowledge management situation in the developing countries are not understood clearly. In case of Pakistan, the nuclear technology is being used in many areas of human need. These include energy, agricultural, medical and industrial applications. Also by the end of third decade, the Authorities have set target to go for generating electricity through nuclear technology near to 800 MW. NKM is also vital for the new generation to understand the technology from elder`s experiences and through proper knowledge preservation. This could only be done by adopting a proper nuclear knowledge management strategy. Keywords: Nuclear knowledge management, preservation, Pakistan. Citedy By: Global irradiation on horizontal surface at Hyderabad, Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Kalhoro, A. N. and Abro, A. K. Journal: Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology,Vol.24(1),2005--Pages45--52 Abstract: The measurement of global irradiation on horizontal surface at PCSIR (Pakistan Council of Scientific \& Industrial Research) Laboratories, Hyderabad, Pakistan, for the period of January-June,|2003 is presented in this paper. During six months the total global irradiation received on horizontal surface at Hyderabad Laboratories is 1. 080238MW-h-m2. The daily irradiation data (Watt-h/Sq.m) has been collected on continuous basis by means of EPLAB Pyranometer and EPLAB Electronic Integrator provided with DIGITEC printer system. HP X-Y recorder (potentiometer) is also connected for continuous data recording of solar intensity (mV). The weather effect over the radiation income was observed regularly and proportion of sunny, cloudy, partly cloudy and dusty days is plotted. Monthly mean daily irradiation bifurcated for sunny and cloudy days are also shown separately. To give an overview of sky conditions, the monthly clearness index is calculated. The highest value of average irradiation per day was recorded in June (7.15 kW/m2) and minimum recorded in January (4.11 kW/m2). The summer season, although rich in radiation with long sunshine duration, brings dust storms along with many partly cloudy or cloudy days, mostly in the month of May and likely in June as well. This could be an additional barrier for solar energy applications especially in desert areas; therefore the study was made for evaluating the effect of dust on the radiation flux. The purpose of the study is the development of rural life in Pakistan such that the inhabitants of rural areas may need not to wait for the connection to national grid. This study will help in improving the efficiency of solar thermal devices, (currently fabricated on theoretical basis at the laboratories), according to experimental data. Keywords: Global irradiation, efficiency of solar thermal devices, Hyderabad, Pakistan Citedy By: Wind and Solar energy in Quetta (Pakistan). [PDF] Author: Ilyas, S. Z., Nasir, S. M. and Badshah, T. Journal: Research Journal University of Balochistan,Vol.3(1),2005--Pages178--180 Abstract: Hourly wind speed data at Quetta (meteorological observations in Pakistan) have been analysed to determine monthly and annual wind power and these are compared with the monthly mean solar radiation energies for the period 1990-1994. The monthly average wind speed range from 2.5 to 4.4 m/sec while the solar radiation varies from 3.6 to 7.65 k Wh/m2. Keywords: Wind Energy, Solar energy, Quetta, Pakistan Citedy By: Biosynthesis of Methanol from CO2 and CHs by Methanotrophic Bacteria. [PDF] Author: Zhu, L., Xin, J., Cui, J., Niu, J., Hua, S., Chun-Gu, X. and Li, S. Journal: Biotechnology,Vol.3(1),2004--Pages67--71 Abstract: Methanotrophs can oxidize methane to carbon dioxide through sequential reactions catalyzed by a series of enzymes including methane monooxygenase, methanol dehydrogenase, formaldehyde dehydrogenase and formate dehydrogenase. Reducing carbon dioxide to methanol is an opposite reaction of methanol oxidation, which requires a considerable amount of energy. So far there are no known organisms whose normal biological role is reduction of carbon dioxide to methanol. In this paper, we report that bioconversion of carbon dioxide to methanol was successfully ,achieved using resting cells of methanotrophic bacteria of Methylosinus trichosporium IMV 3011 as biocatalysts. Extracellular methanol is energyintensive and requires reducing equivalent to push the reaction along energy laws. For long-term maintenance of methanol synthesis, methane was selected as a substrate for regeneration of reducing equivalent. By alternate reaction and regeneration, the results show that resting cell of M .trichosporium IMV 3011 can be used for many times to catalyze the reduction of carbon dioxide, in which the origin of the reducing equivalent is methane. It is possible to theoretically deduce that the overall reaction for methanol synthesis can be completed by biocatalysis using greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide and methane) as raw materials without adding hydrogen. This new route should be environmentally bengin and a selective process operating at room temperature and normal pressure. Also, it is theoretically possible that the overall reaction can produce methanol without adding to the greenhouse effect Keywords: Methanol Biosynrhesis, Methanotrophs, methanol oxidation, carbon dioxide bioconversion, Citedy By: Environment and solar energy technologies. [PDF] Author: Zaidi, Z. I. Journal: Nucleus,Vol.40(42739),2004--Pages29--35 Abstract: Technologies for fossil fuel extraction, transportation, processing and their use have harmful impact on the environment which cause direct and indirect negative impact on human health, animals, crops and structure etc. The end use of all the fossil fuels is combustion irrespective of the final purpose i.e. heating, electricity production and motive power for transportation. The main constituent of fossil fuels are carbon and hydrogen but some other ingredients, which are originally in the fuel e.g. sulphur or are added during refining e.g. lead, alcohol etc. Combustion of the fossil fuel produce various gases (COx, SOx NOx, CH,), soot, ash, droplets of tar and other organic compounds, which are all released into the atmosphere. High rate of population growth and industrialization in the developing countries are causing unsustainable use of forest resources and fossil fuels, hence, are serious hurdles in environmental improvement. The situation in Pakistan is even worse as it has very limited fossil fuels and 40 \% of its commercial energy requirement are to be imported every year. Renewable energy technologies on the other hand, can play a vital role in improving the environmental condition globally. Pakistan Council of Renewable Energy Technologies (PCRET) is working in the field of renewable energy technologies. The Council has developed solar modules and solar thermal devices including solar cookers, solar dryers, solar stills and solar water heaters. The paper describes these devices and contribution they can make toward the improvement of environment. Keywords: Environment, solar energy technologies, fossil fuel extraction Citedy By: The effect of building regulations and energy conservation measures in domestic sector on national energy consumption. [PDF] Author: Samo, S. R., Akhund, M. A. and Brohi, K. M. Journal: Quaid-e-Awam University Research Journal of Engineering, Science and Technology,Vol.5(1),2004--Pages65--72 Abstract: In England, housing accounts for some 30 \% of total fuel consumption and a similar proportion of energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emission [1]. A study has been conducted to analyse the effect of the legislations \& UK thermal building regulations on national energy consumption in housing. This research paper presents data on the percentage of dwelling stock, the energy consumption, energy cost and carbon dioxide (CO2) emission in different types of dwellings, which comply different building regulations from 1965 to 1995. It was found that 66 \% of the dwelling stock, which comply the building Regulations before 1965, consumes 73 \% of total energy used in housing. This dwelling stock is also responsible for 75 \% of carbon dioxide (CO2) emission. Whereas currently only 4 \% of the dwelling stock complies the latest building regulations 1995 which consume 2 \% of energy \& produce a similar percentage of carbon dioxide (CO2) emission in housing. Since the large portion of the dwelling stock is comprised of old dwellings, therefore the greatest potential for energy conservation measures can be found in improving these dwellings instead of constructing new dwellings. Keywords: building regulations, energy conservation, energy consumption. Citedy By: Cost effective solar water heater for energy resource management in developing countries. [PDF] Author: Qureshi, M. A., Moghal, M. R., Hassan, K. M. and Qureshi, S. A. Journal: New Horizons: Journal of the Institution of Electrical \& Electronics Engineers Pakistan,Vol.44(1),2004--Pages114--120 Abstract: As solar water heater is not a new idea but our basic approach is to reduce cost of the heater, used for domestic purpose, so that utilization of solar energy can reach to a common man. Now-a-days every nation is facing energy crisis and most of the engineers and scientists have devoted themselves to overcome energy problems and to conserve energy by designing machinery which consumes less fuel for specific purposes. A solar water heater is a long-term investment that will save you money and energy for many years. Like other renewable energy systems, solar water heaters minimize the environmental effects of enjoying a comfortable, modern lifestyle. In addition, they provide insurance against energy price increases, help reduce our dependence on foreign oil, and are investments in everyone's future. Solar water heaters do not pollute. By investing in one, you will be avoiding carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, and the other air pollution and wastes created when your utility generates power or you burn fuel to heat your household water. When a solar water heater replaces an electric water heater, the electricity displaced over 20 years represents more than 50 tons of avoided carbon dioxide emissions alone. Carbon dioxide traps heat in the upper atmosphere. Keywords: solar water heater, energy resource management, developing countries. Cost effective Citedy By: The multi-fuel solution for power plants. [PDF] Author: Pathan, M. I., Shaikh, N. A. and Nawaz, Z. Journal: Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,Vol.23(1),2004--Pages99--106 Abstract: Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) Technology offers an attractive alternative of conventional pulverized coal and natural gas power generation in terms of cycle efficiency \& emission compliance. But while operating cost is low, the high capital cost of IGCC has threatened its competitiveness. The improvement in turbine, gas clean up and other design addresses the challenge of high capital cost. The competitive nature of power generation industry could threaten the IGCC Technology. For a developing country like Pakistan, it is obligatory that all energy options must be pursued vigorously including coal utilization, which is considered to be one of the major options for the future use. Keywords: fuel solution, power plants, natural gas power generation, conventional pulverized coal Citedy By: Estimation of the potential of biogas production form livestock residue in Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Muhammad, K., Uqaili, M. A. and Meon, M. D. Journal: Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology,Vol.23(4),2004--Pages257--266 Abstract: Biomass is the most significant energy source in Pakistan, which accounts for about 37 \% of its total primary energy supply. About 70 \% of country's population lives in rural areas and are linked with agriculture. The people in these areas meet about 95 \% of their domestic fuel needs by burning bio fuels such as wood, animal dung, crop residue, charcoal, etc. They also use kerosene oil as fuel for cooking and lighting. The present methods of biomass specially livestock residue utilization are energy inefficient and require government intervention for the introduction of efficient conversion systems. In the present study, the potential of biogas production from livestock residue in Pakistan is estimated and their possible substitution with conventional fuels specially in rural areas is looked upon. The study concludes that the potential of biogas production from livestock residue in Pakistan of the order of 8.8-17.2 thousand million m3 year. Biogas alone could supply cooking, heating and lighting energy requirements of about 65 \% of the country's rural population. Promotion of biogas technology seems to be one of the best options to offset the fossil fuel and wood consumption especially in rural areas and to facilitate recycling of agro-animal residues as a bio fertilizer. Moreover, being clean and renewable, it would also contribute towards environment protection, sustenance of ecosystem and conservation of biodiversity. All efforts should be made to make optimum use of it. An action-oriented national energy policy needs to be initiated for biogas production from livestock residue and its effective utilization. Keywords: biogas production, livestock residue, Pakistan Citedy By: Thermal insulation of roof using clay tiles. [PDF] Author: Memon, M., Ansari, A. A. and Memon, A. B. Journal: Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology,Vol.23(3),2004--Pages183--190 Abstract: Thermal insulation of buildings is essential for effective temperature control for the minimum possible consumption of energy that may be used to keep the atmosphere warm in winter through heating, and cool in summer through air conditioning. Systematic studies have been carried out in western countries to minimize the use of energy for heating with the help of thermal insulation. However, this is equally important for tropical countries like ours as well. Because direct exposure of roof of a building to sunshine during hot days of summer cause lot of discomfort inside the rooms due to conduction of heat from the top. Therefore, thermal insulation of roof or ceiling is essential so that the inside temperature may not be adversely affected drastically. This is particularly important in the plains of Pakistan where the temperature soars to 52C. Therefore, attempt has been made to check the effectiveness of clay tiles as roof thermal insulation which is inexpensive and locally available in plenty. A systematic study has been carried out, the results of which are presented in this paper. The results are encouraging and a temperature reduction of up to 15C has been achieved. On the day when out said temperature was 47C the inside temperature was only 32C. Keywords: roof insulation, clay tiles, energy consumption, Pakistan Citedy By: Stress corrosion cracking prevention using solar electricity. [PDF] Author: Harijan, K., Uqaili, M. A. and Mirani, M. Journal: Quaid-e-Awam University Research Journal of Engineering, Science and Technology,Vol.5(1),2004--Pages27--36 Abstract: Metallic structures exposed to soil and water naturally experience corrosion due to electrolytic action. These structures are also subjected to sustained tensile stresses. The combined effects of corrosion and stress results in stress corrosion cracking (SCC). Removal of either of these i.e. stress or corrosion prevents SCC. The cathodic protection (CP) prevents corrosion, and hence prevents stress corrosion cracking. Solar photovoltaic (PV) generated electricity can be best external power source for CP systems especially in remote areas. This paper presents CP system using solar PV generated electricity as an external power source for prevention of SCC of metallic structures. The paper also compares CP systems using solar electricity with those of CP systems using conventional electricity. The paper concludes that a solar electricity power system provides a reliable solution for powering CP stations especially in remote areas, enables the placing of CP units in any location, and thus ensures optimal current distribution for the exact protection requirements. The paper also concludes that solar electricity CP systems are well suited for SCC protection of metallic structures especially in remote areas of an energy deficit country like Pakistan. Keywords: Stress corrosion, solar electricity, Metallic structures Citedy By: Energy options for Pakistan in a geological perspective. [PDF] Author: Gauhar, S. H. Journal: Science Vision,Vol.8(42798),2004--Pages73--75 Abstract: The modern industrial civilization which has principally developed during the last century differs from all previous civilizations in the amounts of energy it uses in sustaining its rate of growth. The most critical aspect of the present-day development scenario is that the rate of increase in energy-consumption is not simply arithmetical, it is geometrical and increases exponentially due to population increase coupled with a rising standard of living. For a country like Pakistan, dependable and affordable supply of energy is of critical importance in order to industrialize the economy and to alleviate poverty. Although the energy related problems of Pakistan are formidable, but fortunately they are not entirely insurmountable, and geology holds the key to provide hope, options and solutions. The paper discusses the available energy-options for Pakistan in a geological context, and recommends measures which can hopefully ensure a better energy scene and thus a brighter future for Pakistan. Keywords: Energy options, Pakistan, Citedy By: Production of Biogas at mesophilic and thermophilic temperatures. [PDF] Author: Ali, I., Ali, M. M., Basit, M. A. and Khan, A. R. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research,Vol.47(1),2004--Pages5--8 Abstract: Experiments were accomplished for the production of biogas using.a slurry comprising 50 \% fresh buffalo dung and 50 \% water at ambient and elevated temperatures. After 2 weeks, observations for the release of biogas were noted. It was observed that with the increase of temperature \# jhe rate of generation of gas was enhanced. A slurry containing 200g fresh buffalo dung and 200g water produced 121.5 ml gas/day at an average ambient temperature of 35C, whereas 45C, 50C, 55C and 60C, the average rates of gas generation were noted as 152.0, 221.5, 292.0 and.354.0 ml/day. The volume of 232.5 ml of biogas in excess was produced with the temperature difference of 25C (60C - 35C). The input of 42000 joules of energy for heating 400 ml of slurry produced gas of 5196.375 joules. It shows that there is a loss of 36803.625 joules of heat which makes the process, thermally, not viable. Hence, ambient temperature is` recommended for the production of biogas for domestic plants. Keywords: biogass production, mesophilic temperatures, thermophilic temperatures, buffalo dung Citedy By: Energy-conserving stoves review. [PDF] Author: Ali, I. Journal: Science, Technology and Development,Vol.23(1),2004--Pages21--32 Abstract: Stoves/burners are combustion appliances widely used for extraction/conversion of the energy of fuels for thermal purposes, heating, etc. Various types of stoves/burners have been discussed here for burning fossil/non-fossil fuels solid, liquid and gases. Energy-conserving models of stoves/burners have been presented here, with special reference to their thermal efficiencies. The information conveyed is important and useful for energy-saving and designing of thermally efficient combustion appliances. Accidents caused by the bursting of stoves have also been discussed. Several improved designs of household cooking-stoves have been evaluated and are discussed in this paper along with relevant safety measures. Keywords: Energy-conserving stoves, fossil/non-fossil fuels, combustion appliances Citedy By: Wind energy potential & its characteristic distribution for power generation at Hyderabad Sindh, [PDF] Author: Ahmed, M. A. and Ahmad, F. Journal: Karachi University Journal of Science,Vol.23(42737),2004--Pages21--26 Abstract: Wind characteristics and wind energy potential for Hyderabad Sindh are presented. These were evaluated using mean monthly wind speed data at a height of 10 m above the ground for the year 1995-1999. The minimum \& maximum wind speeds are 3.2 m/sec in December and 9.0 m/sec in July respectively. Accordingly the maximum mean power output exploitable from the wind at this site is 2.7 K W, using 5 m dia wind turbine blade. The annual mean energy density available in the wind was found to be 1531 K W h m-1. Thus the potential year for a round wind energy utilization at Hyderabad, Sindh is good enough to run a tube well for agriculture use \& small scale power generation. The Weibull parameters c and k for Hyderabad was also estimated to see the pattern of wind for its efficient use. It has been observed that the prospect of wind energy utilization is fairly bright and feasible for this area. Keywords: Wind energy potential, power generation, Hyderabad, Pakistan. Citedy By: Study of trends and behaviour of climatological parameters at Karachi, Pakistan, in solar and wind energy utilization perspective. [PDF] Author: Ahmad, F., Qidwai, A. A. and Ulfat, I. Journal: Karachi University Journal of Science,Vol.31(42737),2004--Pages1--9 Abstract: The climatological parameters of Karachi (Lat. 24o.54'N, Long: 67o.08'E) are studied in detail to investigate the variation and climatic transition, if any. Conventional climatic indicators such as sunshine hours, maximum and minimum temperature, cloud covers, relative humidity, wind velocity, sea-level pressure, rainfall were examined for a period of 10 years. The analysis showed remarkable consistency, regular repeated pattern and identical trend over the years, for all the parameters, depicting a stable climate for Karachi. The temperature and sunshine hours show a maxima in the months of May and November and shows a dip in the Monsoon months (July to September), whereas the parameters such as cloud cover, relative humidity, rainfall and wind speed show maxima in the Monsoon months. A fine correlation is also observed among temperature, cloudiness, wind and sunshine data when analyzed in solar and wind energy utilization perspective. From the clear sky conditions almost throughout the year and analysis of long-term data, it is evident that the prospects of solar and wind energy utilization are bright in Karachi. Keywords: Soalr energy. Wind energy, climatological parameters, Pakistan, Citedy By: Design of an impulse current tester for energy maters. [PDF] Author: Sheikh, N. M. and Nasir-Ud-Din, E. Journal: New Horizons: Journal of the Institution of Electrical \& Electronics Engineers Pakistan,Vol.41(1),2003--Pages42990 Abstract: Design for generating and recording of a pulse of current up to 4000A for a duration of around one msec is discussed. A PC is used for interfacing and storage. The results achieved are compared with the theoretical analysis. Keywords: Pulse recording, theoretical analysis Citedy By: Use of triangulation method on solar radiations. [PDF] Author: Raza, S. M. and Kamal, L. Journal: Research Journal University of Balochistan,Vol.1(1),2003--Pages75--84 Abstract: For countrywide estimation of solar energy radiation in Pakistan, the Triangulation method in relationships between monthly mean daily solar radiation and monthly mean sunshine hours per day is used by the Authors to generate values of solar radiation, for the stations where only the sunshine house data is available. Keywords: triangulation method, solar radiation, Pakistan. Citedy By: Environmental friendly initiatives in oil & gas sector of Pakistan. [PDF] Author: Raza, H. A. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Environmental Science,Vol.1(1),2003--Pages82--86 Abstract: Pakistan energy mix is highly dependent on oil and gas. Out of the present annual energy demand of 43 million tons of oil equivalent, the share of oil is 43 \% , natural gas 45 \% , hydro-electricity 11 \% and of coal 5 \% (Pakistan Energy Yearbook 2000). This energy mix with substantive share of natural gas and hydro-electricity can be highly environment friendly. Keywords: Oil a7 gas sector, Pakistan, Environment Citedy By: A note on wind energy in Quetta Valley, Baluchistan. [PDF] Author: Raja, I. A. and Abidi, S. B. H. Journal: Pakistan Journal of Environmental Science,Vol.1(1),2003--Pages99--102 Abstract: The wind energy potential in Quetta Valley is investigated, using the wind data from two observatories and based on three observations in a day i.e. morning, noon and evening. The evaluation procedure included a review of the wind condition in the valley and the estimation of energy that can be extracted from it. The study revealed that the valley experiences good wind speed. The annual mean wind speed lies around 2.6 ms-1, while the maximum speed occurs in the evening. Keywords: wind energy, Quetta, Pakistan Citedy By: Thermoelectric power of CdTe thin films prepared by vacuum evaporation method. [PDF] Author: Rahman, M. M., Khan, M. K. R., Zaman, Y., Hakim, M. O. and Choudhury, M. G. M. Journal: Nucleus,Vol.39(42798),2003--Pages137--143 Abstract: Cadmium Telluride (CdTe) thin films of different thickness have been prepared by vacuum evaporation method on glass substrate at room temperature. X-ray diffraction and thermoelectric power (TEP) measurements were carried out on these films. The XRD pattern shows that as-deposited films are amorphous in character. Thermoelectric power (TEP) measured from room temperature to 450 k and it shows positive value at room temperature and decreases with the increase of temperature upto T \~ 314 K, above which it remains almost constant. At higher temperature T \textgreater 410 K, TEP becomes negative. These experimental results reveal that there are two types of carriers present in as-deposited films. In low temperature region, dominant carriers are holes and at high temperature (T \textgreater 410 K) it is electron. The activation energy Eo and temperature coefficient of activation energy $\gamma$ have been calculated from TEP data. Eo and $\gamma$ varies with film thickness and their values range from 0.52 to 1.21 eV and 7.05 10-4 to 18.4 10-4 eVK-1 respectively. It is found that TEP does not vary systematically with film thickness, which is one of the characteristics of amorphous materials reported in the next. Keywords: Cadmium Telluride (CdTe) films, Thermoelectric power, vacuum evaporation method Citedy By: Control system for VSI static reactive power compensators. [PDF] Author: Qureshi, S. A. and And Sanaullah, R. C. H. Journal: New Horizons: Journal of the Institution of Electrical & Electronics Engineers Pakistan,Vol.42(1),2003--Pages74--77 Abstract: Rising energy costs, increased transmission distances and use of large generating machines are resulting in increased demands for reliable and more economic operation of transmission and distribution systems. However, even in the most efficient power transmission and distribution system, some transmission losses are inevitable. To overcome losses in weak system where minor losses are considerable reactive power compensation is a well established technology. By reducing the negative impact of reactive power in high voltage AC networks, the capacity of transmission systems can be dramatically increased. For this VSI-SVC (Voltage Source Inverter Static Reactive Power Compensator) is the best solution. This paper deals in design of control system for a VSI-SVC by considering the requirements of the AC system and the requirements of the SVC itself. These are combined to produce a schematic block diagram describing the control system of the SVC connected to a simple power system [I]. Keywords: static reactive power compensators, power transmission, design, control Citedy By: A novel wind energy conversion scheme WECS for optimum load sharing. [PDF] Author: Azzam-Ul-Asrar and Amjadullah, M. Ayaz Journal: Journal of Science and Technology,Vol.27(1),2003--Pages25--29 Abstract: In the field of Wind Energy very little work has been carried out in designing a power conversion system but a lot of research has been done in designing wind turbines and generators. In this paper, a novel wind-energy conversion scheme [WECS] for optimum load sharing is proposed and experimentally verified through a small-scale model developed in the laboratory. The idea of lumping together the output of wind generators in the wind farm is proposed. Moreover, it is demonstrated that a single independent generator, against a group of wind generators, whose outputs are lumped together as a single units, is able to optimally share the load power in proportion with its generated voltage. Keywords: wind energy conversion, power conversion system, wind turbines, generators Citedy By: Biomass fuel burning and its implications: deforestation and greenhouse gases emissions inPakistan, [PDF] Author: SNA Tahir, M Rafique,AS Alaamer Journal: Environmental Pollution,Vol.158(7),2010--Pages2490-2495 Abstract: Pakistan is facing problem of deforestation. Pakistan lost 14.7% of its forest habitat between 1990 and 2005 interval. This paper assesses the present forest wood consumption rate by 6000 brick kilns established in the country and its implications in terms of deforestation and emission of greenhouse gases. Information regarding consumption of forest wood by the brick kilns was collected during a manual survey of 180 brick kiln units conducted in eighteen provincial divisions of country. Considering annual emission contributions of three primary GHGs i.e., CO2, CH4and N2O, due to burning of forest wood in brick kiln units in Pakistan and using IPCC recommended GWP indices, the combined CO2-equivalent has been estimated to be 533019ty-1. Keywords: Deforestation, Biomass burning, Brick kilns, Greenhouse gas emission, Pakistan Citedy By: 29 Study of geothermalenergyresources ofPakistanfor electric power generation [PDF] Author: I Ahmad,A Rashid Journal: Energy Sources, Part A: Recovery, Utilization & Environmental Effects,Vol.32(9),2010--Pages- Abstract: Pakistan is an energy deficient society and is facing a severe shortage of electric power. The country's electricity demand is rising 11% annually, while production is far less than the demand. The energy sector relies heavily on the imports of fossil fuels to satisfy their energy needs, while development of hydropower is very slow. Renewable energy development in the country is almost negligible and no major policy exists to exploit the renewable resources. This study discusses the scope of power production from geothermal energy. Geothermal energy is now considered one of the promising alternate energy resources. It is renewable, reliable, clean, and safe for the environment. Pakistan has enough economically and technically exploitable geothermal potential that can be harnessed and utilized. Geothermal reservoirs in the northern areas of Pakistan have been identified long ago, however, no serious effort has been made to use this potential for electric power production. This study not only encompasses the availability of such resources but also suggests the means to convert this energy into a useful form. In the end, the social, economical, and environmental impacts of this form of energy have also been discussed. Keywords: electric power,geothermal,hot spring,renewable Citedy By: 7 Sectoral analysis of the causal relationship between electricity consumption and real output inPakistan Energy Policy [PDF] researchgate.net Author: CF Tang,M Shahbaz Journal: EnergyPolicy,Vol.60(), 2013--Pages885-891 Abstract: This study uses the annual data from 1972 to 2010 to assess the causal relationship between electricity consumption and real output at the aggregate and sectoral levels in Pakistan. This study covers three main economic sectors in Pakistan namely agricultural, manufacturing and services sectors. Our cointegration results reveal that the variables are cointegrated at the aggregate and sectoral levels. At the aggregate level, we find that there is uni-directional Granger causality running from electricity consumption to real output in Pakistan. At the sectoral level, we find that electricity consumption Granger-causes real output in the manufacturing and services sectors. However, there is no causal relationship between electricity consumption and real output in the agricultural sector. The policy implication of these results is that electricity conservation policies in general would deteriorate the process of economic growth as well as the real output in the manufacturing and services sectors in Pakistan. Nevertheless, we suggest the Pakistani government to implement the electricity conservation policies merely to the agricultural sector because such policies have less or no adverse impact on its real output. Keywords: Electricity consumption,Granger causality,Sectoral, Citedy By: 28 Energyinputs and potential for agricultural production in westernPakistan [PDF] Author: MA Khan, G Singh Journal: Agricultural Systems,Vol.54(3),1997--Pages341-356 Abstract: A survey was conducted from March 1992 to 1993 in Dera Ismail Khan District of Pakistan to investigate the patterns of energy use in crop production from different sources, namely human labor, bullocks, electric motors, diesel engines and tractors. Application of fertilizers and chemicals and crop yields were also recorded. This information was collected from selected farms through biweekly visits. Using the data of the surveyed farms, three projections were made for alternatives with higher levels of farm mechanization and flood control. The findings indicated that, as steps are taken towards increased levels of mechanization with flood control and assured irrigation, there is an increase in total energy inputs, an increase in production and a reduction in cost of production per unit produced. Keywords: Energy Inputs, Pakistan, Agricultural production, Dera Ismail Khan Citedy By: 9 Diagnosing irrigation performance and water productivity through satellite remote sensing and secondary data in a large irrigation system ofPakistan [PDF] pbworks.com Author: MD Ahmad, H Turral, A Nazeer Journal: Agricultural Water Management,Vol.96(4),2009--Pages551-564 Abstract: Irrigation policy makers and managers need information on the irrigation performance and productivity of water at various scales to devise appropriate water management strategies, in particular considering dwindling water availability, further threats from climate change, and continually rising population and food demand. In practice it is often difficult to access sufficient water supply and use data to determine crop water consumption and irrigation performance. Energy balance techniques using remote sensing data have been developed by various researchers over the last 20 years, and can be used as a tool to directly estimate actual evapotranspiration, i.e., water consumption. This study demonstrates how remote sensing-based estimates of water consumption and water stress combined with secondary agricultural production data can provide better estimates of irrigation performance, including water productivity, at a variety of scales than alternative options. A principle benefit of the described approach is that it allows identification of areas where agricultural performance is less than potential, thereby providing insights into where and how irrigation systems can be managed to improve overall performance and increase water productivity in a sustainable manner. To demonstrate the advantages, the approach was applied in Rechna Doab irrigation system of Pakistans Punjab Province. Remote sensing-based indicators reflecting equity, adequacy, reliability and water productivity were estimated. Inter- and intra-irrigation subdivision level variability in irrigation performance, associated factors and improvement possibilities are discussed. Keywords: Actual evapotranspiration, Equity,Adequacy, Reliability, Water productivity, Surface energy balance Citedy By: Analysis of reactivity induced accidents atPakistanResearch Reactor-1 [PDF] Author: IH Bokhari, M Israr, S Pervez Journal: Annals of Nuclear Energy,Vol.29(18),2002--Pages2225-2234 Abstract: Analysis of reactivity induced accidents in Pakistan Research Reactor-1 (PARR-1) utilizing low enriched uranium (LEU) fuel, has been carried out using standard computer code PARET. The present core comprises of 29 standard and five control fuel elements. Various modes of reactivity insertions have been considered. The events studied include: start-up accident; accidental drop of a fuel element on the core; flooding of a beam tube with water; removal of an in-pile experiment during reactor operation etc. For each of these transients, time histories of reactor power, energy released and clad surface temperature etc. were calculated. The results reveal that the peak clad temperatures remain well below the clad melting temperature during these accidents. It is concluded that the reactor, which is operated safely at a steady-state power level of 10 MW, with coolant flow rate of 950 m3/h, will also be safe against any possible reactivity induced accident and will not result in a fuel failure. Keywords: reactivity induced accidents, Research Reactor, Pakistan, Citedy By: Atmospheric dispersion modeling for an accidental release from thePakistanResearch Reactor-1 (PARR1) [PDF] Author: SS Raza, M Iqbal Journal: Annals of Nuclear Energy,Vol.32(11),2005--Pages1157-1166 Abstract: Atmospheric dispersion modeling and radiation dose calculations have been performed for a postulated accidental airborne radionuclide release from the Pakistan Research Reactor-1 (PARR-1) appropriate to a power upgrade to 10MW. Estimates of releases for various radionuclide groups are based upon US-NRC regulatory guide 1.183. Committed Effective Doses (CEDs) to the public at various downwind distances were calculated using a health physics computer code HotSpot developed at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, University of California, USA. The doses were calculated for various atmospheric stability classes, viz., Pasquill categories AF with site-specific averaged meteorological conditions. The meteorological data on atmospheric stability conditions, mean wind speed and the frequency distribution of wind direction based on data collected near the reactor site have also been analyzed and are presented here. The results indicate that a person located within a downwind distance of about 500m from the reactor would receive more than the permissible CED under the analyzed severe accident scenario. Analysis of one typical year of wind data indicates that the predominant wind direction is EastNorth East (ENE), which occurs at the site for more than 15% of the time. Keywords: Research Reactor, Pakistan, Atmospheric dispersion modeling Citedy By: Investigation of oil-shale pyrolysis processing conditions using thermogravimetric analysis [PDF] Author: Paul T.Williams & Nasir Ahmad Journal: Applied Energy ,Vol.66(2),2000--Pages113-133 Abstract: Four oil-shale samples from two regions of Pakistan have been pyrolysed in a thermogravimetric analyser (TGA) in relation to heating rate and temperature using non-isothermal and isothermal analysis respectively. The heating rates investigated in the TGA were 540 K min-1to a final temperature of 950C. The main region of weight loss corresponding to hydrocarbon oil and gas release was between 200 and 620C, and at higher temperatures, significant weight loss was attributed to carbonate decomposition. It was found that for the oil-shale samples analysed in the TGA, increasing the heating rate shifted the reaction to higher temperatures. The final temperature of the pyrolysis was investigated using the isothermal TGA. The temperature range studied was from 350 to 485C. The data were analysed to determine the kinetic parameters of activation energy and frequency factor using two methods, the Arrhenius and CoatsRedfern analyses. The order of reaction was determined as unity. There was no clear relationship between activation energy and heating rate. The CoatsRedfern method of analysis gave consistently lower values of activation energy compared with the Arrhenius method. Isothermal analysis gave similar results to those obtained using the non-isothermal analysis. Keywords: Kinetics, Oil shale, Pyrolysis, TGA, Pakistan Citedy By: 1 Householdenergyin south Asia [PDF] Author: G Leach Journal: Biomass,Vol.12(3),1987--Pages155-184 Abstract: The paper reviews the use by households of biomass and other fuels in Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, based on several large surveys. Consumption and biomass shares are related to income, household size, settlement size and fuel prices. Major substitutions over time between biomass and other fuels are examined, as the implications of further switching out of biomass fuels. Keywords: Fuel use, fuel prices, fuel substitution, South Asia, rural energy Citedy By: 128 The Shanghai Cooperation Organization, trade, and the roles of Iran, India andPakistan [PDF] tandfonline.com Author: N Norling,N Swanstrm Journal: Central Asian Survey,Vol.26(3),2007--Pages429-444 Abstract: This article seeks to explore the implications of Shanghai Cooperation Organization's (SCO) engagement with India, Pakistan and Iran. Not in terms of power-politics or as a counterbalance to the USA as this has been explored elsewhere, but what practical problems such an expanded organization could help solve, what opportunities it could realize, and how SCO's engagement in trade is a function of favourable political and bilateral developments in the region. It is argued here that the trade, infrastructure and energy sectors are of particular importance and that substantial potential gains could be realized if coordination is improved. Nevertheless, it is also recognized that China, Russia, Pakistan, India and Iran have lower standards of democratic development and economic transparency than the West. What is the motivation behind the SCO's engagement with India, Pakistan and Iran? Should this engagement be conceived only in terms of balancing US unipolarity or are there legitimate concerns of increasing regional cooperation in Eurasia? Keywords: Shanghai Cooperation Organization, energy sectors, Pakistan, Iran, India Citedy By: 43 The relationship between carbon dioxide emissions,energyconsumption, and GDP: A recent evidence fromPakistan [PDF] tandfonline.com Author: O Mohiuddin,S Asumadu Sarkodie Journal: Cogent Engineering,Vol.3(1),2016--Pages- Abstract: In this study an attempt was made to investigate carbon dioxide emissions, energy consumption (EC), GDP, and electricity production from oil, coal and natural gas, a recent evidence from Pakistan by employing a time series data spanning from 1971 to 2013. The study employed the vector error correction model to estimate the long-run equilibrium relationship. There was evidence of long-run equilibrium relationship running from EC, electricity production from coal, electricity production from natural gas, electricity production from oil and GDP to carbon dioxide emissions. The policy implication of the VEC model means that a 1% increase in energy production from oil in Pakistan will increase carbon dioxide emissions by 13.7% in the long-run. There was evidence of a unidirectional causality running from EC to carbon dioxide emissions, electricity production from natural gas to EC, EC to electricity production from oil, electricity production from natural gas to GDP and GDP to electricity production from oil. Evidence from the generalized impulse-response analysis shows that three components contribute to carbon dioxide emissions in Pakistan, which include EC, energy production from gas and GDP. Keywords: carbon dioxide emission,energy consumption,economic growth,GDP,Pakistan,environmental sustainability engineering, Pakistan Citedy By: 15 Energytrade as a confidence-building measure between India andPakistan: a study of the Indo-Iran trans-Pakistanpipeline project [PDF] tandfonline.com Author: SG Pandian Journal: Contemporary South Asia,Vol.14(3),2005--Pages- Abstract: To date, there has been no confidence-building measure capable of locking India and Pakistan into an irreversible relationship and acting as a powerful catalyst for bilateral development, prosperity and regional stability. In the absence of mutual trust, confidence and cooperation between these two countries, it becomes imperative to identify potential areas of cooperation to reduce threat perceptions in the region. Although the economic relationship alone does not play a pivotal role in strengthening the foundation on which the political relationship is built, it could be argued that economic factors have a considerable leverage in influencing the political relationship. In this regard, a focus on energy trade gains significant attention. The energy trade between India and Pakistan has enormous potential to lock them into an irreversible economic interdependence, thereby reinforcing their efforts to intensify relations in other potential areas of cooperation. This paper is an effort to identify the scope for energy trade to act as an economic confidence-building measure in Indo-Pakistan by studying the costbenefit analysis of Pakistan's inclusion in an Indo-Iran natural gas pipeline project. It analyses in detail India's energy strategy and the economic rationale for trans-Pakistan pipeline. Finally, the paper analyses the potential benefits of a trans-Pakistan pipeline for both India and Pakistan, and its possible impact in creating political constituencies essential for reducing regional conflict. Keywords: Energy Trade, Indo-Iran trans-Pakistanpipeline, political relations Citedy By: 20 Short-and long-run relationships between natural gas consumption and economic growth:Evidence fromPakistan, [PDF] Author: M Shahbaz,M Arouri,F Teulon Journal: Economic Modelling,Vol.41(),2014--Pages219-226 Abstract: This paper examines the dynamic relationship between natural gas consumption and economic growth in Pakistan using a multivariate model by including capital and labor as control variables for the period between 1972QI and 2011QIV. The results of the ARDL bound testing indicate the presence of cointegration relationships among the variables. The estimated long-run impact of gas consumption on economic growth is greater than other factor inputs suggesting that energy is a critical driver of production and growth in Pakistan. Furthermore, the results of causality test suggest that natural gas consumption and economic growth are complements. Given that natural gas constitutes to the primary source of energy in Pakistan, the implication of this study is that natural gas conservation policies could harm growth and, therefore, requires the policy makers to improve the energy supply efficiency as well as formulate appropriate policies to attract investment and establish publicprivate partnership initiatives. Keywords: Gas consumption, Economic growth, Cointegration, Pakistan Citedy By: Financial development andenergyconsumption nexus in Malaysia: a multivariate time series analysis [PDF] uni-muenchen.de Author: F Islam,M Shahbaz, AU Ahmed,MM Alam Journal: Economic Modelling,Vol.30(),2013--Pages435-441 Abstract: Despite a bourgeoning literature on the existence of long run relationship between consumption of energy and economic growth, results on the direction of causality so far, remain elusive. A growing economy needs more energy, which is exacerbated by growing population. Evidence suggests that financial development can reduce energy use by increasing energy efficiency. Economic growth and energy consumption in Malaysia have been rising in tandem over the past several years. The three public policy objectives of Malaysia are: economic progress, population growth and financial development. It is of interest to the policymakers to understand the dynamic interrelation among the stated objectives. The paper explores the existence of a long run relation among energy use, aggregate production, financial development and population in Malaysia; and causality using the Vector Error Correction Model (VECM). The results suggest that energy consumption is influenced by economic growth and financial development, both in the short and the long run, but the populationenergy relation holds only in the long run. The findings have important policy implications for balancing economic growth vis--vis energy consumption for Malaysia, as well as other emerging nations. Keywords: Financial development, Energy consumption, ARDL, Economic growth,Malaysia Citedy By: 148 Coal consumption: An alternateenergyresource to fuel economic growth inPakistan [PDF] uni-muenchen.de Author: Saqlain Latif Satti, .Muhammad Shahid Hassan, Haider Mahamood Journal: Economic Modelling,Vol.36(),2014--Pages282-287 Abstract: This study is an attempt to revisit the causal relationship between coal consumption and economic growth in case of Pakistan. The present study covers the period of 19742010. The direction of causality between the variables is investigated by applying the VECM Granger causality approach. Our findings have exposed that there exists bidirectional Granger causality between economic growth and coal consumption. The Cumulative Sum (CUSUM) and Cumulative Sum of Square (CUSUMSQ) diagrams have not found any structural instability over the period of 19742010. Keywords: Pakistan, Economic growth, Coal consumption, Pakistan Citedy By: 15 Electricity consumption-GDP nexus inPakistan: A structural time series analysis, [PDF] econ-jobs.com Author: M Javid, A Qayyum Journal: Energy,Vol.64(1 ),2014--Pages811-817 Abstract: This study investigates the relationships among electricity consumption, real economic activity, real price of electricity and the UEDT (underlying energy demand trend) at the aggregate and sectoral levels, namely, for the residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural sectors. To achieve this goal, an electricity demand function for Pakistan is estimated by applying the structural time series technique to annual data for the period from 1972 to 2012. In addition to identifying the size and significance of the price and income elasticities, this technique also uncovers UEDT for the whole economy as well as for sub-sectors. The results suggest that the nature of the trend is not linear and deterministic but stochastic in form. The UEDT for the electricity usage of the commercial, agricultural and residential sectors shows an upward slope. This upward slope of the UEDT suggests that either energy efficient equipment has not been introduced in these sectors or any energy efficiency improvements due to technical progress is outweighed by other exogenous factors. Keywords: Electricity, STSM, UEDT, Pakistan, ARDL Citedy By: 15 Wind and solarenergyinPakistan [PDF] Author: SM Nasir, SM Raza Journal: Energy,Vol.18(4),1993--Pages397-399 Abstract: Hourly wind-speed data at four meteorological observatories (Quetta, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore) in Pakistan have been analysed to determine monthly and annual wind power and these are then compared with the monthly mean solar radiation energies for the period 19801984. The monthly average wind speeds for the four stations range from 2.5 to 4.4, 2.75 to 6.7, 0.6 to 1.7, and 0.7 to 1.6 m/sec while the solar radiation varies from 3.6 to 7.65, 3.39 to 6.31, 2.4 to 6.35, and 2.8 to 6.27 kWh/m2, respectively. Keywords: Solar Energy, Wind Energy, Pakistan, renewable energysources Citedy By: 9 A hybrid fuzzy mathematical programming-design of experiment framework for improvement of energy consumption estimation with small data sets and uncertainty: The cases of USA, Canada, Singapore, Pakistan and Iran [PDF] researchgate.net Author: A Azadeh,M Saberi,SM Asadzadeh, M Khakestani Journal: Energy,Vol.36(12),2011--Pages6981-6992 Abstract: Utilization of small data sets for energy consumption forecasting is a major problem because it could create large noise. This study presents a hybrid framework for improvement of energy consumption estimation with small data sets. The framework is based on fuzzy regression, conventional regression and design of experiment (DOE). The hybrid framework uses analysis of variance (ANOVA) and minimum absolute percentage error (MAPE) to select between fuzzy and conventional regressions. The significance of the proposed framework is three fold. First, it is flexible and identifies the best model based on the results of ANOVA and MAPE. Second, the framework identify conventional regression as the best model for future energy consumption forecasting because of its dynamic structure, whereas in the case of uncertainty and ambiguity, previous studies assume that fuzzy regression provides better solutions and estimation. Third, it is ideal candidate for short data sets. To show the applicability of the hybrid framework, the data for energy consumption in Canada, United States, Singapore, Pakistan and Iran from 1995 to 2005 are considered and tested. This is the first study which introduces a hybrid fuzzy regression-design of experiment for improvement of energy consumption estimation and forecasting with relatively small data sets. Keywords: Hybrid framework, Fuzzy regression, Small data sets, Uncertainty, Energy consumption, Pakistan, Iran Citedy By: 8 Emissions from biomassenergyuse in some selected Asian countries [PDF] researchgate.net Author: SC Bhattacharya,PA Salam, M Sharma Journal: Energy,Vol.25(2),2000--Pages169-188 Abstract: In this paper, an attempt has been made to estimate the annual emission of certain greenhouse and other gases and substances from biomass energy sources in selected countries of Asia. For this purpose, the reported values of the different emission factor for biomass combustion have been compiled from an extensive literature review. From the compiled values, a set of emission factors of different gases/pollutants for each fuel-combustion system combination is obtained for each country. The emission factors for the carbon containing gases, i.e. CO2, CO and CH4, are corrected by multiplying each emission factor by a correction factor to avoid over- or under-estimation of total carbon emission. Estimated biomass energy use by technology and the corrected emission factors are used to estimate the total emissions in the selected countries. Keywords: biomassenergy, Emissions, Asian Countries Citedy By: Monitoring urban transport air pollution andenergydemand in Rawalpindi and Islamabad using leap model [PDF] researchgate.net Author: R Shabbir, SS Ahmad Journal: Energy,Vol.35(5), 2010--Pages2323-2332 Abstract: A research associated with urban transportation was carried out in Rawalpindi and Islamabad to analyze the status of emission of air pollutants and energy demands. The study included a discussion of past trends and future scenarios in order to reduce the future emissions. A simple model of passenger transport has been developed using computer based software called Long-Range Energy Alternatives Planning System (LEAP). The LEAP model was used to estimate total energy demand and the vehicular emissions for the base year 2000 and extrapolated till 2030 for the future predictions. Transport database in Rawalpindi and Islamabad, together with fuel consumption values for the vehicle types and emission factors of NOx, SO2and PM10corresponding to the actual vehicle types, formed the basis of the transport demand, energy consumption and total emission calculations. Apart from base scenario, the model was run under three alternative scenarios to study the impact of different urban transport policy initiatives that would reduce energy demand and emissions in transport sector of Rawalpindi and Islamabad. The prime objective was to arrive at an optimal transport policy, which limits the future growth of fuel consumption as well as air pollution. Keywords: Energy demand, LEAP,Urban transport, Emissions, Scenarios analysis, Rawalpindi & Islamabad Citedy By: Forecasting the diffusion of wind power inPakistan, [PDF] academia.edu Author: K Harijan,MA Uqaili, M Memon, UK Mirza Journal: Energy ,Vol.36(10),2011--Pages6068-6073 Abstract: About half of the Pakistans population has no access to electricity and per capita consumption is one of the lowest in the world. The country is facing severe energy crisis due to shortage of electricity and gas supply. About two-third of the total electricity is generated from fossil fuels. Pakistan heavily depends on imported energy due to limited indigenous reserves and production of oil. The production, transportation, transformation and consumption of fossil fuels also adversely affect the quality of the environment due to indiscriminate release of toxic substances. This shows that Pakistan must develop alternate, indigenous and environment friendly energy resources, like wind energy, to face these challenges. This paper presents the market penetration forecasts of wind power in Pakistan under different policy scenarios. The diffusion of wind power is forecasted using logistic model and analogous approach. The study concludes that about 42, 58 and 73% of the countrys total technical potential of wind power generation could be exploited by the year 2030 under SS, MS and OS scenarios respectively. The development and utilization of wind power would reduce the pressure on oil imports, protect the environment from pollution and improve the socio-economic conditions of the people of Pakistan. Keywords: Wind energy, Environment friendly, Logistic model, Analogous approach, Pakistan Citedy By: 30 Evaluation of wind power production prospective and Weibull parameter estimation methods for Babaurband, SindhPakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: SF Khahro, K Tabbassum, AM Soomro, L Dong Journal: Energy Conversion and Management,Vol.78(),2014--Pages956-967 Abstract: Pakistan is currently experiencing an acute shortage of energy and urgently needs new sources of affordable energy that could alleviate the misery of the energy starved masses. At present the government is increasing not only the conventional energy sources like hydel and thermal but also focusing on the immense potential of renewable energy sources like; solar, wind, biogas, waste-to-energy etc. The recent economic crisis worldwide, global warming and climate change have also emphasized the need for utilizing economic feasible energy sources having lowest carbon emissions. Wind energy, with its sustainability and low environmental impact, is highly prominent. The aim of this paper is to explore the wind power production prospective of one of the sites in south region of Pakistan. It is worth mentioning here that this type of detailed analysis is hardly done for any location in Pakistan. Wind power densities and frequency distributions of wind speed at four different altitudes along with estimated wind power expected to be generated through commercial wind turbines is calculated. Analysis and comparison of 5 numerical methods is presented in this paper to determine the Weibull scale and shape parameters for the available wind data. The yearly mean wind speed of the considered site is 6.712m/s and has power density of 310W/m2at 80m height with high power density during April to August (highest in with wind speed 9.595m/s and power density 732W/m2). Economic evaluation, to exemplify feasibility of installing wind turbines, is also done. The estimated cost of per kWh of electricity from wind is calculated as 0.0263US$/kWh. Thus the candidate site is recommended for some small stand-alone systems as well as for wind farm. Keywords: Wind energy, Power density function, Weibull distribution, Frequency distribution, Wind rose Citedy By: Review on sustainable thermalenergystorage technologies, Part I: heat storage materials and techniques [PDF] Author: SM Hasnain Journal: Energy Conversion and Management ,Vol.39(11),1998--Pages1127-1138 Abstract: This paper reviews the development of available thermal energy storage (TES) technologies and their individual pros and cons for space and water heating applications. Traditionally, available heat has been stored in the form of sensible heat (typically by raising the temperature of water, rocks, etc.) for later use. In most of the low temperature applications, water is being used as a storage medium. Latent heat storage on the other hand, is a young and developing technology which has found considerable interest in recent times due to its operational advantages of smaller temperature swing, smaller size and lower weight per unit of storage capacity. It has been demonstrated that, for the development of a latent heat thermal energy storage system, the choice of the phase change material (PCM) plays an important role in addition to heat transfer mechanisms in the PCM. Attempts have also been made to utilize technical grade phase change materials as storage media and embedded heat exchange tubes/heat pipes with extended surfaces in order to enhance the heat transfer rate to/from the PCM. Keywords: Solar energy applications, Thermal energy storage, Sensible heat storage, Phase change material, Extended surfaces, Heat pipe Citedy By: 832 Analysis and inter-comparison ofenergyyield of wind turbines inPakistanusing detailed hourly and per minute recorded data sets [PDF] Author: A.Makkawi, Y. Tham, T.Muneer Journal: Energy Conversion and Management ,Vol.50(9), 2009--Pages2340-2350 Abstract: Within Pakistan the rather ease of availability of hydrocarbon gas reserves in Balochistan had the effect of delaying the work on feasibility of renewable energy and installation of appropriate pilot projects. However, with a clear sign of depletion of fossil fuels the present government has initiated a major programme of wind speed measurement and installation of large wind farms at locations that have been deemed fit for this purpose. The key force behind the present resurgence of renewable energy activity within Pakistan is the creation of the Alternative Energy Development Board (AEDB), established by the Government of Pakistan in 2003. Under the aegis of AEDB wind speed data have been measured over a period of 4 years at a minutes frequency for Southern Pakistan at Gharo. The period of measurement was 20022006.The present work aims to explore the potential for using hourly- as opposed to minute-by-minute data for the design of wind energy systems, the former set being much more widely available for a larger number of locations within the developing world. This work has therefore centred on finding the difference in the wind energy production by using: (a) a measured long-term, minute-by-minute data, and comparing this with (b) a concurrent hourly data set. Furthermore, a comparison of the cumulative frequency of wind speed from the latter data sets has also been carried out. It was found that the difference between the annual energy outputs from the latter two data sets was in close agreement with only a % difference. The two cumulative frequency functions were also found to be closely related. These results be of use for locations close to the equatorial belt where the wind regime is noted for its stable and seasonal character. Keywords: Wind energy, Wind resource assessment, Wind turbine generators Citedy By: 16 Energyand economic growth: a case study ofPakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: T Riaz Journal: Energy Economics,Vol.9(3),1987--Pages195-204 Abstract: The paper investigates the relationship between energy consumption and economic growth with special reference to Pakistan. It then establishes future energy needs of the country and presents a long-run energy plan to meet these requirements. The energy-economy relationship is explained. The analysis shows that energy shortages can be extremely harmful for a developing country like Pakistan. However, the energy problem is one of shortages of capital and foreign exchange which can be dealt with by prudent planning of remittances from the Middle East. Keywords: Economic growth,Energy consumption,Interrelationship Citedy By: 7 The dynamic links betweenenergyconsumption, economic growth, financial development and trade in China: fresh evidence from multivariate framework analysis [PDF] semanticscholar.org Author: M Shahbaz, S Khan, MI Tahir Journal: Energy Economics ,Vol.40(),2013--Pages8-21 Abstract: This study investigates the relationship between energy use and economic growth by incorporating financial development, international trade and capital as important factors of production function in case of China over the period of 19712011. The ARDL bounds testing approach to cointegration was applied to examine long run relationship among the series while stationarity properties of the variables was tested by applying structural break test.. Our empirical evidence confirmed long run relationship among the variables. The results showed that energy use, financial development, capital, exports, imports and international trade have positive impact on economic growth. The Granger causality analysis revealed that unidirectional causal relationship running from energy use to economic growth. Financial development and energy use Granger cause each other. There is bidirectional causality between international trade and energy use. The feedback relation exists between financial development and international trade. There is also bidirectional causality exists between capital and energy demand, financial development and economic growth and, international trade and economic growth. This paper makes significant contribution in energy economics and opens up new direction for policy makers to explore new and alternative sources of energy which would be helpful in meeting the rising demand of energy due to sustained rate of economic growth. Keywords: Growth, Energy, Financial development, Trade Citedy By: 151 Eye and respiratory symptoms among women exposed to wood smoke emitted from indoor cooking: a study from southernPakistan, [PDF] researchgate.net Author: AR Siddiqui, K Lee, EB Gold,ZA Bhutta Journal: Energy for Sustainable Development,Vol.9(3), 2005--Pages58-66 Abstract: Prolonged exposure to wood smoke as cooking fuel on a daily basis has been associated with increased occurrence of respiratory and other ailments. Accumulated data from developing countries have linked acute and chronic eye and respiratory conditions to indoor air pollution exposures. The present study compared self-reported eye and respiratory symptoms among women who used wood as fuel to those who used natural gas (NG) in a semi-rural setting from southern Pakistan. During the winter season, a total of 122 wood (n = 57) and NG users (n = 65) were interviewed regarding history of acute eye and respiratory symptoms the immediate past two weeks. In addition, histories of difficulty in breathing during the past year and of ever having asthma were also ascertained. Unadjusted estimates showed that wood users reported a higher frequency than NG users of eye congestion (odds ratio (OR) = 4.2, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.8-10.1), nasal congestion (OR = 2.5, 95% CI = 1.1-5.5), throat-related symptoms (OR = 5.4, 95% CI = 2.4-12.5), and cough (OR = 3.8, 95% CI = 1.7-8.6). Similarly, wood users had higher odds of reporting difficulty in breathing any time during the past year (OR = 3.9, 95% CI = 1.7-8.8) and ever having asthma (OR = 3.3, 95% CI = 1.5-8.1) compared to NG users. Our study showed an interactive effect of age with wood use. Acute eye symptoms were more frequently reported by wood users who were younger than age 28 years (OR = 5.1, 95% CI = 1.3-19.8) than by NG users; however, a smaller, marginally significant difference was observed in older women. A greater proportion of older wood users reported chronic respiratory symptoms, mainly cough (OR = 6.6, 95% CI = 1.9-26.7) than NG users, but no significant difference was observed for younger women. Throat-related symptoms were associated with wood use after adjusting for the effect of body mass index (BMI) (OR = 5.9, 95% CI = 2.6-14.2); eye and other respiratory symptoms were significantly associated with wood use only in women with a BMI of < 19.8 kg/m2. This cross-sectional study demonstrated that overall eye and respiratory symptoms were significantly associated with wood use in this setting. Future longitudinal study is needed to establish the etiological role of wood smoke in eye and respiratory ailments. Keywords: respiratory problems, wood smoke, indoor cooking, southernPakistan Citedy By: 27 The political economy of trans-Pakistangas pipeline project: assessing the political and economic risks for India [PDF] Author: S Pandian Journal: Energy Policy,Vol.33(5),2005--Pages659-670 Abstract: There is a growing realisation among Indian policy makers to consider the import of natural gas to address India's growing energy demand. Among many policy options to import natural gas, Indo-Iran overland pipeline option is considered to be effective and economical in addressing India's long-term energy demands. Such a pipeline would have to traverse Pakistani territory thereby necessitating a role for Pakistan in the pipeline project. Though security guarantees have been offered, India refuses to entertain the role of Pakistan in the project for a fear of its energy supply being disrupted in case of a military conflict with Pakistan. This paper argues that gas pipeline project is not only aimed at addressing India's energy concerns but also to further its strategic objectives. This paper contends that India, Iran and Pakistan do not have shared objective to make the overland project a political and commercial reality. India's stakes in the overland pipeline project are high as India's economic interests in the pipeline project are not in congruence with the politico-economic and strategic objectives of Iran and Pakistan. Keywords: Indo-Iran, Natural gas imports, Risks, political economy Citedy By: 31 Residential electricity use and the potential impacts ofenergyefficiency options inPakistan [PDF] Author: ME Eiswerth, KW Abendroth, RE Ciliano, A Ouerghi Journal: Energy Policy ,Vol.26(4),1998--Pages307-315 Abstract: Rising demands for electricity, stresses on generating systems, and concerns over environmental quality have led to increased interest in the potential benefits of energy efficiency options in a number of developing countries. In an effort to analyze electricity consumption patterns and the potential for conservation, the World Bank has managed the Pakistan Household Energy Strategy Study. One component of that study, the first of its kind in a developing country, has involved the collection of household metering and survey data to support the estimation of hourly demand regression equations and the development of energy efficiency simulation software. This manuscript summarizes the methods and results. Keywords: Energy, Efficiency, Electricity, Developing countries, Pakistan Citedy By: 16 Diffuse solar radiation estimates from sunshine hours and clearness index for Karachi,Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: F Ahmad,SMA Burney, SA Husain Journal: EnergyConversion and Management,Vol.30(4),1990--Pages439-447 Abstract: Correlations for the estimation of monthly average daily diffuse solar radiation as a function of the sunshine hours and clearness index have been obtained from Karachi. Generally, two types of correlations are used: (a) diffuse radiation as a function of relative sunshine hours and extraterrestrial radiation, and (b) diffuse radiation as a function of global and extraterrestrial radiation. These correlations are mostly first- and second-order polynomials in the sunshine hours and clearness index, indicating the presence of the diffuse solar radiation component. The diffuse solar radiation shows a peak value during the monsoon months of JulyAugust. The diffuse to global ratio is found to be 0.32 from the analysis, and the diffuse to extraterrestrial radiation ratio is nearly 0.19 throughout the year. Among the established relations, Iqbal and Stanhill overestimate the radiation value, while Liu and Jordan underestimate it. Keywords: Diffuse radiation, Clearness index, Sunshine hours, Karachi, Pakistan Citedy By: 7 The economic cost of power outages in the industrial sector ofPakistan [PDF] Author: HA Pasha, A Ghaus, S Malik Journal: EnergyEconomics,Vol.11(4),1989--Pages301-318 Abstract: This paper quantifies the economic cost of power outages in the industrial sector of Pakistan: first, by extending the methodology developed by Munasinghe and Gellerson [7,8] and Sanghvi [11] to allow for long-run adjustments by firms to outages like investment in generators and renegotiation of labour contracts with flexible timing provisions; and second, by incorporating multiplier effects on other sectors. Variation in anticipated and unanticipated outage costs per kWh by type of industry, firm size and location are highlighted by analysing data collected from a nationwide sample of 843 industrial units. A set of policies is derived for pricing and load management in the short run and investment in energy generation in the medium run. Keywords: Industry, Outages, Costs Citedy By: 43 Determinants of electricity consumption function inPakistan: Old wine in a new bottle [PDF] Author: K Zaman, MM Khan, M Ahmad, R Rustam Journal: EnergyPolicy,Vol.50(),2012--Pages623-634 Abstract: The objective of the study is to re-investigate the multivariate electricity consumption function for Pakistan, particularly, economic growth, foreign direct investment and population growth over a 36-year time period, i.e., between 1975 and 2010. The study employed the bounds-testing procedure for cointegration which examines the short-run and long-run estimates. Dynamic short-run causality test is applied to determine the causality direction between electricity consumption and its determinants, by using Wald-Fstatistics. The results reveal that determinants of electricity consumption function are co-ntegrated and influx of foreign direct investment, income and population growth is positively related to electricity consumption in Pakistan. However, the intensity of these determinants is different on electricity consumption. If there is 1% increase in income, foreign direct investment and population growth; electricity consumption increases by 0.973%; 0.056% and 1.605%, respectively. This infers that income, foreign direct investment and population growth induce an increase in electricity consumption in Pakistan. Dynamic short-run causality test indicates that there has been unidirectional causality which is running from population growth to electricity consumption in Pakistan. Keywords: Electricity consumption, Population growth, Pakistan Citedy By: 40 How urbanization affectsenergy-use in developing countries [PDF] Author: DW Jones Journal: EnergyPolicy,Vol.19(7), 1991--Pages621-630 Abstract: This paper identifies mechanisms whereby urbanization affects energy consumption. Industrialization and urbanization accompany each other during economic development, but urbanization exerts a number of independent influences on energy-use. It permits economies of scale in production but requires more transportation. Food must be transported to urbanized populations and relatively smaller agricultural populations must modernize, entailing considerable increases in agricultural energy-use. In cities, a number of production activities which were domestically provided in rural areas, using human or animal energy, shift to sources outside the household, using modern energy sources. The largest single source of change in energy-use is personal transportation. Passenger transport in cities is heavily weighted towards fuel-using modes, particularly as incomes increase. To assess the overall impact, a regression analysis of 59 developing countries for 1980 is conducted. Holding constant per capita income and the extent of industrialization, the elasticity of energy consumption per capita and per dollar of GDP is between 0.35 and 0.48. Keywords: Economic developments,Energy-use, Urbanization, Citedy By: 189 Estimation of solarenergypotential for Islamabad,Pakistan [PDF] sciencedirect.com Author: I Ulfat,F Javed, FA Abbasi, F Kanwal, A Usman Journal: EnergyProcedia,Vol.18(),2012--Pages1496-1500 Abstract: In order to design a solar energy system with optimized performance a through knowledge of solar radiation data for a considerably long period (20-25 years) is a pre-requisite. For developing countries like Pakistan, the need of empirical models to assess the feasibility of solar energy utilization seems inevitable due to the absence and scarcity of trust-worthy solar radiation data. We present such models for the capital city of Pakistan, Islamabad to estimate global and diffuse solar radiation. It is found that with the exception of monsoon month, solar energy can be utilized very efficiently throughout the year. The models suggested could be used for most of the north-eastern areas of Pakistan, which are similar to Islamabad with respect to the climate and the availability of solar radiation but lack in the record of solar radiation data. Keywords: Solar Energy, Pakistan, Citedy By: 11 Evaluation of toxic elements in baby foods commercially available inPakistan [PDF] Author: TG Kazi, N Jalbani, JA Baig,MB Arain, HI Afridi Journal: Food chemistry,Vol.119(4),2010--Pages1313-1317 Abstract: In present work, the concentrations of toxic elements, aluminium (Al), cadmium (Cd), nickel (Ni) and lead (Pb) were measured in different solid baby foods (BFs), primarily to evaluate whether the intakes comply within permissible levels of these toxic elements (TEs). The BFs were evaluated for total contents of TEs, using a simple and fast ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE) method. The accuracy of the proposed UAE method was ensured by using certified reference materials and results obtained by conventional wet acid digestion method on same CRM, at 95% confidence level. The range of the investigated TEs in different BFs were 477035,200, 25.688.3, 124332 and 52.590.6g/kg for Al, Cd, Ni and Pb, respectively. The results indicated that BFs including rice cereals have high level of all four TEs. The daily intakes of TEs for children through BFs have also been estimated, and are well below the recommended tolerable levels. Keywords: Toxic element, Ultrasound energy, Baby food extraction, Atomic absorption spectrometry, Pakistan Citedy By: 33 Environmental impact ofenergyuse in Bangladesh, India,Pakistanand Thailand [PDF] Author: JW Sun, E Kuntsi Journal: Global Environmental Change,Vol.14(2),2004--Pages161-169 Abstract: The environmental impact of energy use in this study is evaluated from two aspects: the level of the utilization of natural sources as measured by energy intensity; the level of environmental stress as measured by CO2emission intensity. This study analyzes the environmental impact of energy use in Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Thailand from 1973 to 2000 based on the International Energy Agency's 2002 database. The findings differ from some previous conclusions, because they conclude that the above four countries are in a process of dematerialization with regard to energy use and are thus heading foward decreasing environmental stress. Keywords: Environmental stress, Energy intensity, CO2emission intensity, Developing countries Citedy By: 10 Energyfor agriculture inPakistan [PDF] iiasa.ac.at Author: M Jameel Journal: IIASA Research Report. 1982,Vol.(),--Pages1-42 Abstract: This study analyses the use of commercial energy in Pakistan agriculture, the main categories considered being chemical fertilizers, irrigation, farm machines, seeds and pesticides. Looking about two decades ahead, the desired output of the agricultural system--food crops, animal products, raw materials for industry--is estimated under reasonable assumptions which are explicitly stated in context. Different mixes of input for achieving the output target are then examined using a scenario approach. The various "futures" studied are combinations of significantly differing alternatives for supplying plant nutrients and doing farm work. Energy implications of each future are worked out and possibilities for energy conservation, having other important benefits as well, are briefly indicated during discussions of water requirements, nutrient needs and farm mechanization. Keywords: Agriculture, Commercial Ebergy, Energy Needs, Pakistan Citedy By: 7 Situational analysis of householdenergyand biomass use and associated health burden of indoor air pollution and mitigation efforts inPakistan [PDF] mdpi.com Author: Z Fatmi, A Rahman, A Kazi, MM Kadir Journal: Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health2010,Vol.7(7),--Pages2940-2952 Abstract: Biomass fuel burning leads to high levels of suspended particulate matter and hazardous chemicals in the indoor environment in countries where it is in common use, contributing significantly to indoor air pollution (IAP). A situational analysis of household energy and biomass use and associated health effects of IAP was conducted by reviewing published and un-published literature about the situation in Pakistan. In addition to attempt to quantify the burden of ill health due to IAP, this paper also appraises the mitigation measures undertaken to avert the problem in Pakistan. Unfortunately, IAP is still not a recognized environmental hazard in Pakistan and there are no policies and standards to control it at the household level. Only a few original studies related to health effects of IAP have been conducted, mainly on womens health and birth outcome, and only a few governmental, non-governmental and academic institutions are working to improve the IAP situation by introducing improved stoves and renewable energy technology at a small scale. Control of IAP health hazards in Pakistan requires an initial meeting of the stakeholders to define a policy and an action agenda. Simultaneously, studies gathering evidence of impact of intervention through available technologies such as improved stoves would have favorable impact on the health, especially of women and children in Pakistan. Keywords: Indoor air pollution (IAP); Pakistan; health impact of IAP; control efforts for IAP Citedy By: 11 Evaluation of solar energy resources by establishing empirical models for diffuse solar radiation on tilted surface and analysis for optimum tilt angle for a prospective location in southern region of Sindh, Pakistan [PDF] Author: SF Khahro, K Tabbassum,S Talpur, MB Alvi Journal: International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems,Vol.64(),2015--Pages1073-1080 Abstract: Diffuse solar radiation data is very important and is required for solar energy system implementations. The main purpose of the present study is to evaluate solar energy resources by establishing diffuse solar radiation models and obtaining optimum tilt angle fora prospective location is southern region of Sindh, Pakistan. Due to the unavailability of measured diffuse solar radiation data, nine new models, based on available data from local agency and values obtain from existing models, to predict diffuse solar radiation on tilted surface has been established. The best model was chosen based on test results from statistical indicators. The optimum tilt angle for monthly, seasonally, half-yearly and yearly adjustment was determined. The optimum tilt angle varies from 0 in , and July to 49 in. The yearly optimum tilt angle was found as 23, which is close to latitude of investigated location (2507'N). The monthly average total, beam and diffuse solar radiations were calculated for optimum and vertical tilted surfaces and were compared with those obtain for horizontal surfaces. The half-yearly adjustment of optimum tilt angle is recommended for the investigated location because very small difference in annual solar energy gains in comparison with monthly or seasonal adjustment. The total annual energy for completer year and for four seasons of the year was calculated and found that maximum total annual energy is obtained at optimum tilt angle. Keywords: Solar radiation; Optimum tilt angle, Diffuse solar radiation models, Statistical indicators, Tilted surfaces, Regression analysis Citedy By: 12 Modelling for policy assessment in the electricity supply sector ofPakistan [PDF] emeraldinsight.com Author: H QudratUllah,M Karakul Journal: International Journal of Energy Sector Management ,Vol.1(3),2007--Pages- Abstract: The purpose of this paper is to provide a longerm assessment of Pakistan's electricity policy in the context of both environmental and resource constraints. To increase the sustainability of energy supply, the Government of Pakistan introduced a series of reforms in the electricity supply sector during 1990 995. In response to these policy incentives, most of the independent power producer offers included coal, oil, and/or gas-based power plants. Considering that Pakistan produces only up to 40 percent of its oil demand domestically and thermal power generation causes CO2emissions, there is a great need for an assessment of the existing electricity policy.Design/methodology/approach. Drawing on system dynamics methodology, this study presents and utilizes a dynamic simulation model that captures the dynamics of the sectors underlying the electricity supply system including investments, capital, production, resources, financial resources, and the environment.FindingsThe key findings of this study are: policy incentives encouraged thermal-based generation at the potential expense of hydro power generation; and the evolution of electricity supply related CO2emissions exhibits an exponential growth.Research limitations/implicationsWhile there are other emissions related to the electricity supply system with potentially severe environmental concerns, for example SO2, this study focuses only on CO2emissions.Originality/valueThe paper offers a system dynamics model and provides some useful policy insights for the electricity supply sector of Pakistan. Keywords: Electric power generation,Environmental management,Resource management,Pakistan Citedy By: 18 A study of biomass as a source ofenergyinPakistan [PDF] Author: GQ Amur, SC Bhattacharya Journal: InternationalEnergyJournal,Vol.21(1), 1999 --Pages- Abstract: Biomass is a major source of energy in Pakistan. However, as in the case of most developing countries, reliable estimates of biomass energy use in different sectors of the country are not available. This paper presents the status of biomass energy use in Pakistan. About 65.07 billion kg consumption has been estimated, which is equal to 22.57 MTOE and accounts for 44% of the total primary energy needs of the country. The share of firewood in the traditional energy is about 56%. The household sector is the major end user and consumes 86% of the total biomass energy. The traditional cook stoves are the major end users of biomass energy, and consume about 80% of the total quantity. Keywords: biomass, Pakistan, Energy use, Pakistan Citedy By: 16 Integrated simulation of snow and glacier melt in water and energy balance-based, distributed hydrological modeling framework at Hunza River Basin ofPakistan [PDF] escholarship.org Author: M Shrestha, T Koike, Y Hirabayashi Journal: Journal of ,Vol.120(10),2015--Pages4889-4919 Abstract: Energy budget-based distributed modeling of snow and glacier melt runoff is essential in a hydrologic model to accurately describe hydrologic processes in cold regions and high-altitude catchments. We developed herein an integrated modeling system with an energy budget-based multilayer scheme for clean glaciers, a single-layer scheme for debris-covered glaciers, and multilayer scheme for seasonal snow over glacier, soil, and forest within a distributed biosphere hydrological modeling framework. Model capability is demonstrated for Hunza River Basin (13,733?km2) in the Karakoram region of Pakistan on a 500?m grid for 3 hydrologic years (20022004). Discharge simulation results show good agreement with observations (Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency?=?0.93). Flow composition analysis reveals that the runoff regime is strongly controlled by the snow and glacier melt runoff (50% snowmelt and 33% glacier melt). Pixel-by-pixel evaluation of the simulated spatial distribution of snow-covered area against Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer-derived 8?day maximum snow cover extent data indicates that the areal extent of snow cover is reproduced well, with average accuracy 84% and average absolute bias 7%. The 3?year mean value of net mass balance (NMB) was estimated at +0.04?myr-1. It is interesting that individual glaciers show similar characteristics of NMB over 3?years, suggesting that both topography and glacier hypsometry play key roles in glacier mass balance. This study provides a basis for potential application of such an integrated model to the entire Hindu-Kush-Karakoram-Himalaya region toward simulating snow and glacier hydrologic processes within a water and energy balance-based, distributed hydrological modeling framework. Keywords: Hunza River Basin, Pakistan, Integrated simulation, glacier melt, energy distributed hydrological modeling, Citedy By: 9 Triangular relationship amongenergyconsumption, air pollution and water resources inPakistan [PDF] Author: MM Khan, K Zaman, D Irfan,U Awan, G Ali Journal: Journal of Cleaner Production,Vol.112(2),2016--Pages1375-1385 Abstract: Literature presents opposing findings about relationship among critical variables such as energy consumption, air pollution, water resources, and natural resource rents. This is particularly true in case of Pakistan. This study aims to narrow the gap by examining the long-run and causal relationship among these variables in Pakistan specific scenario covering a period of 38 years i.e. 1975 to 2012, where all inputs are subject to change. The results show that energy consumption and water resources have a significant positive relationship with air pollution both in short-run and long-run. The relationship further supports the unidirectional causality of the former with the latter and not vice versa. Similarly, the results indicate the continued influence of energy consumption and water resources over air pollution for the next 10 years. The total natural resources rent exhibits the least contributor to affect air pollution in Pakistan. Keywords: Air pollution, Energy consumption, Water resources, Natural resource rents, Pakistan Citedy By: 10 Measurement of natural radioactivity in marble found inPakistanusing a NaI (Tl) gamma-ray spectrometer [PDF] Author: M Iqbal,M Tufail,SM Mirza Journal: Journal of Environmental Radioactivity,Vol.51(2),2000--Pages255-265 Abstract: Due to the widespread use of marble as a building/construction material, experimental measurements of226Ra,232Thand40Kactivities in marble have been carried out using a NaI(Tl) gamma-ray spectrometer with a matrix-inversion-based spectral stripping technique. The samples were collected from various geological formations in Pakistan. The IAEA reference RG-Set was used for calibration of the spectrometer. The photo-peaks at 1460.8, 1764.5 and 2614.6keV due to40K,226Raand232Th, respectively, were used for the corresponding activity measurements. For226Ra,232Thand40K, the measured activity concentrations have been found to lie in the specific ranges 463, 940 and 7105Bqkg-1, respectively, which are towards the lower end of the range of measurements on various geological materials world wide. The radium equivalent activity ranged from 25 to 99Bqkg-1. Values of 0.19 and 0.26 were determined as the average external and internal hazard indices of the marble samples. Keywords: Radioactivity, Uranium, Thorium, Radium, Radon, Potassium-40, Marble, Hazard, Pakistan Citedy By: 121 An empirical analysis of CO2 emission inPakistanusing EKC hypothesis [PDF] researchgate.net Author: K Ahmed, W Long Journal: Journal of International Trade Law and Policy,Vol.12(2),2013--Pages- Abstract: The purpose of this paper is to fill the gap between energy and growth literature in Pakistan. In this regard, the authors investigated the environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) hypothesis and concluded the relationship between carbon emission and other four variables (energy consumption, economic growth, trade openness and population) at the same time. It is hoped that the policy implications of this research will provide a strong base to address the problem of environmental degradation in Pakistan.Design/methodology/approachThis study investigates the relationship between CO2emission, economic growth, energy consumption, trade-liberalization, and population density by using the EKC hypothesis for Pakistan. The cointegration analysis with Auto Regressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) bound testing approach is employed over time series data from the period 1971 to 2008. The stability of model was also checked at the end. FindingsThe results of the study do not support EKC in a short-run, whereas the long-run inverted U shaped hypothesis was confirmed between carbon emission and growth, energy consumption, trade openness and population density. Thus, findings of the study confirmed that EKC was a long-run phenomenon in the case of Pakistan and most interestingly, with all other explanatory variables, population density also appeared to be a contributor to environmental degradation in Pakistan. Originality/valueThis work is original and a new contribution to single country analysis. It is first time that carbon emission is empirically tested for all four major determinants (economic growth, energy consumption, trade-liberalization, and population density) at the same time. The long ranged time series data of 38 years enhances the validity of results. The most surprising finding of this research is that the population density also contributes to environmental degradation in Pakistan. Keywords: Pakistan, Population distribution,Energy consumption, Economic growth, Trade,EnvironmentalKuznets curve, CO2 emission,Population density, Cointegration Citedy By: Electricity consumption-economic growth Nexus: an aggregated and disaggregated causality analysis in India andPakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: F Abbas, N Choudhury Journal: Journal of Policy Modeling,Vol.35(4),2013--Pages538-553 Abstract: This paper empirically examined the causality between electricity consumption and economic growth in two densely populated countries in South Asia, India and Pakistan. The causality analysis was estimated at aggregated and disaggregated level where the focus of the analysis was on the agricultural sector. The disaggregated causality analysis indicated a bi-directional causality between the agricultural electricity consumption and the agricultural GDP in India, while in Pakistan the causality was found to run from agricultural GDP to agricultural electricity consumption. At the aggregated level, India confirmed conservation hypothesis while Pakistan confirmed feedback hypothesis. From the public policy point of view, it can be inferred that, at the macro level, any electricity conservation measures in India will not have an affect on India's increasing economic growth prospects and hence a policy-favourite supply-enhancement strategy in the form of increasing electricity generation needs to be balanced with a demand-management strategy. In case of Pakistan any such policy recommendation is difficult given the bidirectional nature of causality. Keywords: Electricity consumption, Agriculture growth, Causality, Error Correction Modelling, India, Pakistan Citedy By: 47 Severeenergycrises and solar thermalenergyas a viable option forPakistan [PDF] Author: M Farooq,A Shakoor Journal: Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy,Vol.5(1),--Pages- Abstract: The severity of theenergycrisis in Pakistan is increasing rapidly since 20052006 with the increase in theenergy demand for industrial, commercial, and residential sectors. The increase in domesticenergydemand to 40% of the total energyconsumption is due to 3.1% population growth, urbanization, and provision of conventionalenergyresources to widespread rural areas. More than 20% of the total production ofnatural gasis utilized for domesticwaterand space heating.In order to meet the day by day increasing domesticenergyneeds of the country, the industrial and commercial sectors have to face severe consequences like industrial closure for three days in the name of load management that generated unemployment and increased the poverty level in the country. Similarly, due to a shortage of irrigationwaterfrom rivers, most of the farmers are left with no option but to pump ground water, and over a million tube wells utilize already scarce conventionalenergy resources. Moreover, the lack of post harvest treatment of the fruits and vegetables, which needs thermalenergy,is also resulting in wasting 40% of the yield and this is again due to a lack of conventionalenergysupplies in the agricultural farms. Likewise, the textile industry, which is considered the largest industrial sector in the country, uses plenty of hotwaterat 60?C to 70 C using conventionalenergyfor bleaching, dyeing, and printing of cloth. If merely the above mentioned three sectors are shifted to solar thermalenergy,then a huge amount of conventionalenergyresources can be saved and better utilized for other sectors, resulting in significantly reducing theenergyshortage in the country. On the other side, the Government of Pakistan is trying to enhance the production of hydrocarbon and exploit indigenous coal resources for power generation but the conventionalenergy resources are very limited as compared to its demand; therefore all the sincere efforts are not meeting the giant energyneeds. The Government of Pakistan has also introduced aRenewable Energypolicyin 2006 to enhance Renewable Energyshare in theenergymix but it failed to deliver because of several reasons mainly due to focusing only on electricity generation byPVsystems and ignoring solar thermalenergy,which is an economical viable source much needed for local textile industry, post harvest treatment of fruits and vegetables, and for domestic space andwater heating.Solar energy,especially solar thermalenergy,which is abundant in the country, is essentially a main viable option for Pakistan to significantly reduce the burden from conventionalenergy.Optimum use of solar thermal technology can notably reduce by 30% the burden fromnatural gasbut also enhance the export of fruits and vegetables and improve the production of textile and agricultural sectors resulting in a poverty reduction in Pakistan. In order to achieve this milestone, the Government of Pakistan needs to shift itspolicyof depending on conventionalenergyresources to solar thermal technologies forwater heatingwhich can be used in textile, agriculture, and domestic applications. Keywords: energycrises, solar thermal energy, Pakistan Citedy By: 6 Solarenergypotential inPakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: S Adnan, A Hayat Khan, S Haider Journal: Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy,Vol.4(3),2012--Pages- Abstract: In view of the growing needs ofenergyin Pakistan, the efficient use and development ofrenewable energysources has become a major issue in the country. This has brought the intention of several national and multinational companies to design and implement a major work plan forenergy conservation and construction ofrenewable energysources like wind mills andsolar panels.Fortunately, Pakistan is among those countries in which sun warms thesurface throughout the year and therefore has a strong potential forsolar powergeneration. This study was conducted to explore those areas which are most suitable forsolar energy potential using fifty eight meteorological stations covering the whole country. Angstrom equation and Hargreaves formula was used to calculate monthlysolar energypotential by utilizing monthly climatical data of bright sunshine hours, mean maximum and minimum temperatures. The lowest solar radiationintensity 76.49?W/m2observed at Cherat during and highest 339.25?W/m2at Gilgit. The average monthlysolar radiationintensity remains 136.05 to 287.36?W/m2in the country. The results indicate that the values ofsolar radiationintensity greater than 200?W/m2were observed in the months: February to October in Sindh, March to October in almost all regions of Balochistan, April to in NWFP, Northern Areas and Kashmir regions while March to October in Punjab. For 10?h a day, average solar radiationintensity ranges from 1500?W/m2/day to 2750?W/m2/day in Pakistan especially in southern Punjab, Sindh and Balochistan regions throughout the year. In an area of 100 m2, 45?MW to 83?MW power per month be generated in the above mentioned regions. Keywords: Solar Energy potential, Pakistan, renewable energysources Citedy By: 13 A study to incorporate renewableenergytechnologies into the power portfolio of Karachi,Pakistan [PDF] unioviedo.es Author: SMH Ali,MJS Zuberi, MA Tariq,D Baker Journal: Journal of Renewable and SustainableEnergy Reviews,Vol.47(),2015--Pages14-22 Abstract: Karachi is facing severe power outage problems, with 3 to 8 hours of power outages every day, accounting for large economic losses. The city has a total electricity generation capacity of 2848MW and a peak load of 2500MW. This study estimates the potential of Solar, Wind and Biomass renewable energy options to meet part of the electrical demand in Karachi, Pakistan and further discusses the feasibility of the proposed projects. The objective is to define and evaluate a mix of these renewable energies that offsets 10% of the peak load (250MW) of Karachi. The approach is based on the sustainability principle that a city should first attempt to meet its electrical demand using its own resources in order to increase its energy security, support the local economy, and minimize the costs and losses associated with transportation of fuel, and transmission and distribution of electricity. For the proposed mix, 2.9% and 4.4% of the peak load demand is met using Solar Photovoltaic (PV) and Parabolic Trough Collectors (PTC) respectively, 2% from wind and 0.7% from biomass. Also, the proposed mix is found feasible with PV to recover its investment costs in 5 years followed by biomass and wind in 6 years and finally PTC in 17 years. The outcomes of this analysis are significant for the concerned authorities of Pakistan responsible for installing renewable energy utilization projects within its regions. Keywords: Solar,Wind,Biomass,Renewable Energy,Karachi,Pakistan Citedy By: Fuelwood, timber and deforestation in the Himalayas: the case of Basho Valley, Baltistan region,Pakistan [PDF] bioone.org Author: J Ali,TA Benjaminsen Journal: Mountain Research and Development,Vol.(),2004--Pages- Abstract: During the past century the Theory of Himalayan Environmental Degradation has dominated mainstream views concerning natural resource management in the Himalayan region. The main tenet of this theory is that increased human population has resulted in increased demands for natural resources, leading to severe resource depletion, especially deforestation. In this article, we use local data on fuelwood consumption and timber extraction from Basho Valley in northern Pakistan to investigate whether such general perceptions regarding forest depletion can be supported by an empirical case study. The results of this study indicate that local fuelwood collection is not the main cause of deforestation. Instead, the estimated deforestation of about 30% during the last 3 decades is primarily due to commercial harvesting and mismanagement by the government. A large amount of dead fallen wood and green trees was sold by the government or was taken out by a timber mafia that emerged during the main period of commercial harvesting in the 1970s and 80s. Thus, it is commercial and illegal harvesting that has left the forest in such a depleted state that it can no longer withstand the pressure from local use. Keywords: Deforestation,fuelwood,timber,timber mafia,Himalayas,Pakistan Citedy By: 40 Performance of compression ignition engine with indigenous castor oil bio diesel inPakistan [PDF] go.galegroup.com Author: MH Chakrabarti,M Ali Journal: NED University Journal of Research,Vol.6(1),2009--Pages10-19 Abstract: Castor oil available indigenously in Pakistan was converted successfully to bio diesel and blended to 10% quantity (by volume) with high speed mineral diesel (HSD) fuel. This fuel was tested in a compression-ignition engine in order to assess its environmental emissions as well as engine performance parameters. The blended fuel was found to give lower environmental emissions in most accounts except for higher C[O.sub.2] and higher N[O.sub.X]. In addition, three engine performance parameters were assessed, which were engine brake power, engine torque and exhaust temperature. In the first two cases, blended bio diesel fuel gave lower figures than pure mineral diesel due to lower calorific value. However, its higher flash point resulted in higher engine exhaust temperatures than pure mineral diesel. Overall, in terms of engine performance, castor oil bio diesel (from non-edible oil of castor bean--growing on marginal lands of Pakistan) fared better in comparison to canola oil bio diesel (from expensive edible oil) and can be recommended for further tests at higher blend ratios. Keywords: Castor, compression-ignition, bio diesel, indigenous, non-edible. Keywords: compression ignition engine, castor oil, bio diesel, fossil fuel, Pakistan Citedy By: 29 The demand for electricity inPakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: MA Khan,A Qayyum Journal: OPECEnergyReview,Vol.33( 1),2009--Pages70-96 Abstract: This paper examines the patterns of electricity demand in Pakistan over the period 19702006 using autoregressive distributed lag technique to cointegration. Long run and short-run price and income elasticities are examined for the national level and for the three major consumer's categorieshouseholds, industry and agriculture. The overall results suggest that income and price elasticities possess expected signs at aggregate and disaggregate levels in the long run as well as in the short run. The error correction terms possess expected negative signs and are highly significant with reasonable magnitudes. Furthermore, the estimated long run and short-run electricity demand functions remains stable over the sample period. The results thus convey important information to the agents operating in the electricity market regarding the pricing policies and helps in planning the future strategy of electricity demand management. Keywords: Electricity Demand, Islamabad, Pakistan Citedy By: 38 Environmental Kuznets curve andPakistan: an empirical analysis [PDF] sciencedirect.com Author: K Ahmed, W Long Journal: Procedia Economics and Finance,Vol.1(),2012--Pages4-13 Abstract: In this study, the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) is hypothesized to investigate the relationship between CO2emission, economic growth, energy consumption, trade liberalization and population density in Pakistan with yearly data from 1971 to 2008. The cointegration analysis using Auto Regressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) bounds testing approach is incorporated. The results support the hypothesis both in short-run and long-run and inverted U-shaped relationship is found between CO2emission and growth. Interestingly we found trade support the environment positively and population contributes to environmental degradation in Pakistan. The energy consumption and growth are the major explanatory variables which contribute to environmental pollution in Pakistan. Moreover, the time series data analysis is used and the stability of variables in estimated model is also assessed. Keywords: Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC), CO2emission, Energy consumption,Economic Growth, Pakistan, Cointegration Citedy By: 63 Design and performance of a simple single basin solar still [PDF] Author: MA Samee, UK Mirza,T Majeed,N Ahmad Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.11(3),2007--Pages543-549 Abstract: The lack of potable water poses a big problem in southern and south-western arid regions of Pakistan The underground water, where exists, is usually brackish and cannot be used as it is for drinking purposes. Pakistan lies in high solar insolation band and the vast solar potential can be exploited to convert saline water to potable water. The most economical and easy way to accomplish this objective is using solar still. A simple single basin solar still was designed for 33.3 N latitude. The optimum inclination of glass cover was calculated to be 33.3ofor both summer and winter. The average daily output of solar still based on data of 8 days in July 2004 was found to be 1.7 liters/day for basin area of 0.54 m2. Efficiency of the still was calculated as 30.65% with a maximum hourly output of 0.339 liters/hr at 1300 hrs. The drinking water coming from Simly dam filtration plant, Islamabad was desalinated in the solar still. The total dissolved solids (TDS), conductivity and pH of this surface water were measured as 370 ppm, 1.291 mS/cm and 6.72 before desalination and 30 ppm, 41 S/cm and 6.5 after desalination respectively. The ground water of PIEAS colony, Islamabad was also desalinated and results obtained were 544 ppm, 1.668 mS/cm and 6.78 before desalination and 84 ppm, 31 S/cm and 5.74 after desalination. A lab-prepared water sample was desalinated as well and results were, 17663 ppm, 85.3 mS/cm, 7.58 before desalination and 226 ppm, 88.5s/cm, 6.13 respectively, after desalination. The values for TDS and pH agree with the WHO guidelines for drinking water quality. Keywords: Single basin, Solar still, Pakistan, Citedy By: 101 Renewable hot dry rock geothermalenergysource and its potential inPakistan [PDF] Author: NA Zaigham,ZA Nayyar Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.14(3),2010--Pages1124-1129 Abstract: Geothermal energy source, one of the viable renewable energy sources, has encouraging potential to generate full base-load electricity, which has not been explored so far in Pakistan. Though the country can be benefited by harnessing the hydro-geothermal options of energy generation in areas where sources exist, but most of these sources lie in extreme remote and inaccessible rugged mountainous ranges away from the urban-industrial centers. On the other hand, the present study shows that the HDR geothermal option is one of the most viable renewable sources considering the tectonic setup of Pakistan. Results of the study highlight the HDR geothermal energy prospects at relatively deeper depths than hydro-geothermal resources in water-free condition. The basement tectonic analyses reveal that the HDR prospects could be found even just below the urban-industrial centers of Pakistan where there are no hot springs and/or geysers like southern Indus basin in Sindh province or the Kharan trough in the western Balochistan province. Presence of high earth-skin temperature gradient trends derived from satellite temperature data and the high geothermal gradient anomalous zone derived from scanty data of bottom-hole temperatures of some of the oil and gas exploratory wells, indicates encouraging prospects for HDR energy sources in southern Indus and Thar Desert regions inclusive of Karachi synclinorium area. These high geothermal gradients have been inferred to be the result of the deep-seated southern Indus and the Thar fossil-rift structures. Moreover, the prospects of the HDR geothermal energy sources have also been inferred in the Chagai Arc region and the KharanPanjgur tectonic depression in the western part of Pakistan based on the analysis of integrated geophysical data. If HDR prospects are developed, they can offer the sustainable, CO2-free and independent of time, of day, of weather or season, and the base-load energy-generation resource. Keywords: Hot dry rock potential, Geothermal energy source, Pakistan Citedy By: 16 Smart meters for industrialenergyconservation and efficiency optimization inPakistan: Scope, technology and applications [PDF] academia.edu Author: W Aslam, M Soban, F Akhtar,NA Zaffar Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.44(),2015--Pages933-943 Abstract: The electrical grid in most of the developing countries has inefficiencies in different areas such as transmission and distribution, power quality, grid reliability and system protection. These inadequacies in grid operations and asset protection, along with revenue leakage constitute an overall troubled energy profile. The fixes usually proposed in this regard are directed at reducing distribution network losses and improving residential and commercial demand side management. Lessons from the residential and commercial implementation of smart meters can be extended to industrial consumers to help relieve grid congestion and achieve better efficiency goals. This paper reviews smart meter technology and applications across residential, commercial and industrial sectors. We point out the areas for power quality and energy efficiency improvement within industries and propose ways for achieving them through smart meters, specifically in the context of Pakistan. We have incorporated empirical evidence from experimental setup at our university grid as proof of concept. We have also elaborated on the implementation methodology to avoid the possible pitfalls in the proposed solution. Keywords: Smart meters, Energy efficiency, Industries, Pakistan Citedy By: 12 Prospect of biodiesel inPakistan [PDF] Author: NA Khan,H el Dessouky Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.13( 67),2009--Pages1576-1583 Abstract: Developing countries like Pakistan need continuous supply of cheap energy. It is common fear in todays world that fossil fuels will be depleted soon. The cost of energy is increasing continuously and is expected to be at its peak by 2050. Many technologically advanced countries are successfully using renewable energy sources for their energy needs, however, they still believe in the importance of fossil fuel. In renewable energy field, Pakistan is using hydropower for energy needs successfully, whereas project regarding solar and wind energy is in progress. Biomass, a renewable energy source, is gaining interest in many researchers because it produces similar type of fuel extracted from crude oil. Energy from biomasses only depends upon the availability of cheap raw material.Biodiesel, which is produced by the reaction of vegetable oil and alcohol, can be used with same or with better performance in diesel engine. It is a clean fuel that causes less environment pollution as compared to petro diesel. High cost and non-continuous supply of vegetable oil is the main hurdle for its general acceptance. Many advanced countries have developed strategy for continuous supply of cheap price energy crops (source of biomass). Biodiesel is the only possible reciprocal to petro diesel or otherwise diesel engine will be useless after the depletion of crude oil. In this study, biodiesel as an energy source has been discussed; this is indigenous diesel engine fuel and is beneficial for our environment, economy, and more importantly will increase the income of our farmers. Keywords: Vegetable oil, Ethanol, Transesterification, biodiesel, fossl fuel, Pakistan Citedy By: 43 Potential of bioenergy production from industrial hemp (Cannabis sativa):Pakistanperspective [PDF] Author: MSU Rehman,N Rashid, A Saif,T Mahmood Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.18(),2013--Pages154-164 Abstract: Pakistan is facing severe economical crunch due to continuously growing gap between energy demand and supply. The shortage in power and gas supply has already halted many industrial sectors such as textile, small and medium enterprises and local transportation. The government has spent US $ 9 billion on energy import during 20082009 to fulfill current energy requirements. Indigenous energy resources, mainly fossil fuels, are already being exploited at their maximum. Besides these short term steps, energy demand is expected to double during next decade. Thus, renewable and sustainable energy resources, such as biomass, needs to be exploited so that a sustainable energy mix could be employed to ensure energy security. Industrial hemp (Cannabis sativa) has been successfully investigated for its potential to be used as a renewable feedstock for the production of biofuels. Hemp is an environmental friendly and low cost feedstock which grows wildly in most parts of Pakistan. Thus, hemp can be grown as a potential energy crop in Pakistan to meet its energy requirements by producing various kinds of biofuels. This sustainable feedstock will help the country to reduce its energy import bills, and ensure sustainable energy supply. Keywords: Bioenergy, Industrial hemp, Sustainable development, Pakistan Citedy By: 34 Comparative study ofenergysaving light sources [PDF] researchgate.net Author: N Khan,N Abas Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.15(1),2011--Pages296-309 Abstract: Techno-economic performance comparison of compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) with light emitting diodes (LED), electrode less fluorescent lamps (EEFL), fluorescent tubes, incandescent bulbs, photovoltaic (PV) and fiber optic lighting systems was carried out in view of worsening power and energy crisis in Pakistan. Literature survey showed 23W CFL, 21W EEFL, 18W fluorescent tube or 15W LED lamps emit almost same quantity of luminous flux (lumens) as a standard 100W incandescent lamp. All inclusive, operational costs of LED lamps were found 1.21, 1.62. 1.69, 6.46, 19.90 and 21.04 times lesser than fluorescent tubes, CFL, EEFL, incandescent bulbs, fiber optic solar lighting and PV systems, respectively. However, tubes, LED, CFL and EEFL lamps worsen electric power quality of low voltage networks due to high current harmonic distortions (THD) and poor power factors (PF). Fluorescent lamps emit UV and pollute environment by mercury and phosphors when broken or at end of their life cycle. Energy consumption, bio-effects, and environmental concerns prefer LED lamps over phosphor based lamps but power quality considerations prefer EEFL. CFL and EEFL manufacturers claim operating temperatures in range of -20C<TCFL<60C and -30C<TCFL<50C but CFL frequently damage in wet and damp locations. Costs of low THD and high PF CFL, EEFL and LED lamps be five to ten times higher that high THD and low PF lamps. Choice of a lamp depends upon its current THD, PF, life span, energy consumption, efficiency, efficacy, color rendering index (CRI) and associated physical effects. This work proposes manufacturing and user level innovations to get rid of low PF problems. Keeping in view downside of phosphor based lamps our research concludes widespread adoption of LED lamps. Government and commercial buildings consider full spectrum hybrid thermal photovoltaic and solar fiber optic illumination systems. Keywords: Power quality,CFL,LED,EEFL,THD,PF,TPV,Fiber optics Citedy By: 112 A vision for hydrogen economy inPakistan [PDF] Author: UK Mirza,N Ahmad,T Majeed,K Harijan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.13(5),2009--Pages1111-1115 Abstract: Fossil fuels possess very useful properties not shared by non-conventional energy sources that have made them popular during the last century but unfortunately they are not renewable. Since the oil crisis of 1973, considerable progress has been made in the search for alternative energy sources. Among the candidates, hydrogen holds a pre-eminent position because of its high energy content, environmental compatibility and ease of storage and distribution. Hydrogen can be produced in a variety of ways. Water electrolysis is one of the most utilized industrial processes for hydrogen production. This article discusses advantages and disadvantages of hydrogen energy. Besides, barriers and challenges to hydrogen economy have been summarized. The current energy situation in Pakistan is presented followed by a road map to hydrogen economy in Pakistan. It is concluded that a combination of fuel cells and a hydrogen infrastructure is a way forward to combat the long-term challenges of climate change and energy security for Pakistan. The hydrogen economy potentially offers the possibility to deliver a range of benefits for the country; however, significant challenges exist and these are unlikely to be overcome without serious efforts. Keywords: Hydrogen, Pakistan, Energy policy, Hydrogen economy Citedy By: The real life scenario for diffusion of renewableenergytechnologies (RETs) inPakistanLessons learned through the pilot field study under physical community [PDF] Author: Shah, RS Rashidi, A Bhutto, A Shah Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.15(5),2011--Pages2210-2213 Abstract: In Pakistan less or almost no work has been reported, which investigated the response of local people in a physical community regarding the diffusion and acceptance of renewable energy technologies (RETs). In order to identify the ground realities, this research has undertaken this task by conducting a pilot field study, which not only provides the response of physical community for RET but also identified the main hurdles in RET diffusion in Pakistan. This paper is an extension of our earlier research work in which the root causes responsible for dilemmas in Pakistan's policies were identified for the cause of sustainable development through renewable energy. Keywords: Renewable energy technologies (RETs), Community, Solar dehydrator, Sustainable development, Pakistan Citedy By: 11 What makes people adopt improved cookstoves? Empirical evidence from rural Northwest, Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: Inayatullah Jan Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.16(5),2012--Pages3200-3205 Abstract: Large dependence of the world population on biomass fuels for domestic energy consumption is one of the major anthropogenic causes of deforestation worldwide. The use of biomass in inefficient ways in rural areas increases fuelwood demand of a household. Development of the improved biomass stove programs in the 1970s has been one of the efforts to reduce burden on biomass resource base through reliable and efficient methods of energy consumption. However, despite having multiple economic, social, environmental, and health benefits; the improved stove dissemination programs failed to capture worldwide recognition. A wide array of socio-cultural, economic, political, and institutional barriers contributes to the low adoption rate of such programs. Drawing on field work surveys in rural northwest Pakistan, this paper provides empirical evidence of individual, household, and community level variables that play a vital role in the adoption of improved cookstoves. The study is based on primary data collected from 100 randomly selected households in two villages of rural northwest Pakistan. Using regression analysis, the study depicts that education and household income are the most significant factors that determine a household willingness to adopt improved biomass stoves. The study concludes that the rate of adoption could substantially be improved if the government and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) play a greater role in overcoming the social, economic, cultural, political, and institutional barriers to adopting improved cooking technologies. Keywords: Deforestation, Biomass, Indoor pollution, Improved cookstoves, Regression analysis, Pakistan, Citedy By: Greenerenergy: Issues and challenges forPakistan-geothermalenergyprospective [PDF] researchgate.net Author: T Abbas,AA Bazmi,AW Bhutto,G Zahedi Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.31(),2014--Pages258-269 Abstract: There is an indispensable need to develop geothermal technologies to supplement the long-term energy needs of Pakistan to a significant level. Geothermal energy is one of the oldest, most versatile and also most common form of utilization of renewable energy. Pakistan is rich in geothermal energy, many of the researchers highlighted and emphasized about its importance, but due to less awareness, lack of confidence and management, no realistic work has been done so far in this domain. This paper investigates the progress of geothermal energy sources, technologies and its potential. Finally the prospects for the geothermal energy sources in Pakistan are described to encourage national and international investment in developing these resources. Keywords: Renewable energy, Geothermal energy, Pakistan, Citedy By: 9 A review on global solarenergypolicy [PDF] researchgate.net Author: KH Solangi,MR Islam,R Saidur,NA Rahim Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.15(4), 2011--Pages2149-2163 Abstract: To overcome the negative impacts on the environment and other problems associated with fossil fuels have forced many countries to inquire into and change to environmental friendly alternatives that are renewable to sustain the increasing energy demand. Solar energy is one of the best renewable energy sources with least negative impacts on the environment. Different countries have formulated solar energy policies to reducing dependence on fossil fuel and increasing domestic energy production by solar energy. This paper discusses a review about the different solar energy policies implemented on the different countries of the world. According to the 2010 BP Statistical Energy Survey, the world cumulative installed solar energy capacity was 22928.9MW in 2009, a change of 46.9% compared to 2008. Also this paper discussed the existing successful solar energy policies of few selected countries. Based on literatures, it has been found that FIT, RPS and incentives are the most beneficial energy policies implemented by many countries around the world. These policies provide significant motivation and interest for the development and use of renewable energy technologies. Also the status of solar energy policy for Malaysia is investigated and compared with that of the successful countries in the world. Keywords: Citedy By: 447 A comparative review of China, India andPakistanrenewableenergysectors and sharing opportunities [PDF] academia.edu Author: S Ahmed,A Mahmood, A Hasan,GAS Sidhu Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,Vol.57(), 2016--Pages216-225 Abstract: China, India and Pakistan (CIP) contain almost 40% of the world population and constitute a developing region which is desperately seeking energy resources to fulfill the growing economy requirements. CIP are three main countries of South Eastern Asia with nuclear capability and have greater potential of energy sharing for the regional prosperity and socio economic development. The total energy consumption of China and India is 3682.15 Million tons of Oil Equivalent (MTOE) which is approximately 28% of the world. The energy consumption of Pakistan is far less i.e. 85.75 MTOE however, it can play a pivotal role by providing energy sharing opportunities in the region. This paper presents a comparative and comprehensive review of CIP renewable energy sectors and possible sharing opportunities. Cleaner and abundant Renewable Energy Sources (RES) like hydro, solar, wind, biomass, nuclear and geothermal have been discussed and compared in context of CIP energy requirements. CIP relations and energy sharing opportunities have also been elaborated in context of regional peace and security situation. Exploitation of the CIP energy potential and energy sharing opportunities might contribute to global peace and prosperity. Keywords: China, India and Pakistan (CIP), GDP, Energy mix, Renewable Energy Sources (RES) Citedy By: 10 Potential contribution of ethanol fuel to the transport sector ofPakistan [PDF] Author: K Harijan, M Memon,MA Uqaili, UK Mirza Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews ,Vol.13(1),2009--Pages291-295 Abstract: Pakistan is an energy-deficient country. The indigenous reserves of oil and gas are limited and the country is heavily dependent on the import of oil. The oil import bill is a serious strain on the country's economy and has been deteriorating the balance of payments situation. The country has become increasingly more dependent on fossil fuels and its energy security hangs on the fragile supply of imported oil that is subject to disruptions and price volatility. The transport sector has a 28% share in the total commercial energy consumption in Pakistan. About 1.15 million tonnes of gasoline was consumed by this sector during 20052006. The gasoline consumption in the transport sector is also a major source of environmental degradation especially in urban areas. Consequently, Pakistan needs to develop indigenous, environment-friendly energy resources, such as ethanol, to meet its transport sector's energy needs. Pakistan produces about 54 million tonnes of sugarcane every year. The estimated production potential of ethanol from molasses is about 500 million liters per annum. Ethanol can be used in the transport sector after blending with gasoline, in order to minimize the gasoline consumption and associated economical and environmental impacts. This paper presents the assessment of the potential contribution of ethanol in the transport sector of Pakistan. It is concluded that 510% of the annual gasoline consumption in transport sector could be met from ethanol by the year 2030 under different scenarios. About US$200400 million per annum could be saved along with other environmental and health benefits by using gasol in the transport sector. Keywords: Ethanol, Gasol,Transport sector,Renewable energy,Pakistan Citedy By: 19 Review of geothermalenergyresources inPakistan [PDF] Author: NA Zaigham,ZA Nayyar, N Hisamuddin Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews ,Vol.13(1),2009--Pages223-232 Abstract: Pakistan, despite the enormous potential of its energy resources, remains energy deficient and has to rely heavily on imports of hydrocarbon products to satisfy hardly its needs. Moreover, a very large part of the rural areas does not have the electrification facilities because they are either too remote and/or too expensive to connect to the national grid. Pakistan has wide spectrum of high potential renewable energy sources, conventional and as well non-conventional. Many of them have not been adequately explored, exploited and developed. Geothermal energy is one of them. Pakistan can be benefited by harnessing the geothermal option of energy generation as substitute energy in areas where sources exist. Most of the high enthalpy geothermal resources of the world are within the seismic belts associated with zones of crustal weakness like the seismo-tectonic belt that passes through Pakistan having inherited a long geological history of geotectonic events. The present study of the geotectonic framework suggests that Pakistan should not be lacking in commercially exploitable sources of geothermal energy. This view is further strengthened by (a) the fairly extensive development of alteration zones and fumeroles in many regions of Pakistan, (b) the presence of a fairly large number of hot springs in different parts of the country, and (c) the indications of Quaternary volcanism associated with the Chagai arc extending into Iran and Afghanistan border areas. These manifestations of geothermal energy are found within three geotectonic or geothermal environments, i.e., (i) geo-pressurized systems related to basin subsidence, (ii) seismo-tectonic or suture-related systems, and (iii) systems related to NeogeneQuaternary volcanism. A few localities, scattered sporadically all over the country, have been studied to evaluate only some of the basic characteristic parameters of the geothermal prospects. The present review study the geothermal activities of varying intensity and nature, associated with different geotectonic domains, and reveals the viable potential of the geothermal environments, which could be exploited for the generation of sustainable indigenous energy in Pakistan. Keywords: Geothermal energy, Geothermal resource characteristics, Geothermal potential in Pakistan Citedy By: 18 Sustainable development through renewableenergyThe fundamental policy dilemmas ofPakistan [PDF] Author: Asif A.Shah, S. M. Qureshi, Arabella Bhutto Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews ,Vol.15(1),2011--Pages861-865 Abstract: This paper deals with fundamental policy mistakes in Pakistan for the cause of sustainable development through renewable energy. It then identifies that the low level of awareness regarding the potentials of renewable energy is the key hurdle in achieving the said cause. The paper further traces the root cause of this low awareness in educational and S&T policies of Pakistan and finally provides some recommendations to avoid dilemmas related to such policies. Keywords: Sustainable development (SD), Renewable energy (RE), Renewable energy technologies (RET),Policies, Pakistan Citedy By: 15 Energyconsumption, economic growth and prices: A reassessment using panel VECM for developed and developing countries [PDF] researchgate.net Author: R Mahadevan,J AsafuAdjaye Journal: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, , ,Vol.35(4),2007--Pages2481-2490 Abstract: This paper reinvestigates the energy consumptionGDP growth nexus in a panel error correction model using data on 20 net energy importers and exporters from 1971 to 2002. Among the energy exporters, there was bidirectional causality between economic growth and energy consumption in the developed countries in both the short and long run, while in the developing countries energy consumption stimulates growth only in the short run. The former result is also found for energy importers and the latter result exists only for the developed countries within this category. In addition, compared to the developing countries, the developed countries elasticity response in terms of economic growth from an increase in energy consumption is larger although its income elasticity is lower and less than unitary. Lastly, the implications for energy policy calling for a more holistic approach are discussed. Keywords: Energy consumption,Energy prices, Citedy By: Prospects of solar water heating for textile industry in Pakistan [PDF] Author: T Muneer, S.Maubleu, M Asif Journal: Renewable and SustainableEnergy,Vol.10(1),2006--Pages1-23 Abstract: Energy is the prime source of human activities in all sectors of life. Traditionally fossil fuel has been the prime source of energy. However, there are two major concerns regarding fossil fuels, i.e. their rapid depletion and their contribution towards growing global warming. It is being widely realized that for sustainable development presently used energy mediums such as fossil fuel and nuclear power have to be quickly replaced by renewable energy sources. The latter are sustainable and have the potential to meet present and future projected global energy demands without inflicting any environmental impacts. Pakistan is amongst the most prominent cotton producing countries in the world. The affluent availability of local cotton has lead to a well-established textile sector in Pakistan. A large proportion of its cotton products go into export. Being a successful candidate in international textile market Pakistani textile industry is continuously seeking modern and high-tech facilities to improve quality of its products. The biggest challenge Pakistani textile industry is facing today is how to cut down its environmental burdens to cope with the international standards on the issue.Water heating system as required for dying process is one of the major energy consuming areas in fossil fuel-run Pakistani textile industry. Water heating system therefore has a significant contribution towards total environmental impacts associated with textile sector.This work presents an alternate, sustainable solution for water heating by means of fossil fuel. It has been shown herein that under Pakistan's climate solar energy can contribute significantly towards this duty. In the present work two different designs of built-in storage water heaterplain and newly designed finned typewere constructed to compare their thermal performance. Three months of experimental data were collected for the two heaters. The solar fractions for this period were found to be 63 and 73%, respectively. The monetary and embodied energy payback periods for the two heaters were, respectively, found to be 6.7 and 6.1 years, and 185 and 169 days. Keywords: Solar energy, Textile industry, Heaters, Pakistan Citedy By: 77 Windenergydevelopment inPakistan [PDF] Author: UK Mirza,N Ahmad,T Majeed,K Harijan Journal: Renewable and SustainableEnergy Reviews,Vol.11(9),2007--Pages2179-2190 Abstract: Fossil fuels possess very useful properties not shared by non-conventional energy sources that have made them popular during the last century but unfortunately they are not renewable. Since the oil crisis of 1973, considerable progress has been made in the search for alternative energy sources. Among the candidates, hydrogen holds a pre-eminent position because of its high energy content, environmental compatibility and ease of storage and distribution. Hydrogen can be produced in a variety of ways. Water electrolysis is one of the most utilized industrial processes for hydrogen production. This article discusses advantages and disadvantages of hydrogen energy. Besides, barriers and challenges to hydrogen economy have been summarized. The current energy situation in Pakistan is presented followed by a road map to hydrogen economy in Pakistan. It is concluded that a combination of fuel cells and a hydrogen infrastructure is a way forward to combat the long-term challenges of climate change and energy security for Pakistan. The hydrogen economy potentially offers the possibility to deliver a range of benefits for the country; however, significant challenges exist and these are unlikely to be overcome without serious efforts. Keywords: Hydrogen, , Pakistan, Energy policy, Hydrogen economy Citedy By: 28 Energyconsumptioneconomic growth nexus forPakistan: Taming the untamed [PDF] Author: M Ahmed,K Riaz,AM Khan, S Bibi Journal: Renewable and SustainableEnergy,Vol.52(),2015--Pages890-896 Abstract: A recent survey of energy-growth literature has highlighted the potential trade-off between bivariate models that suffer from omitted variable bias, and the danger of over-parameterization of multivariate models in the individual country setting (Narayan and Smyth[2]). This is a serious limitation when the interest is in drawing policy implications for specific countries with short times series of available data. The maximum entropy bootstrap approach was used to re-examine the nature of causal relationship between energy consumption and economic growth for Pakistan where the available time series data was only from 1971 to 2011. Unlike the techniques used in much of the earlier literature, this approach does not rely on asymptotic methods and, therefore, leads to robust inference even in small samples. Moreover, the approach can be applied in the presence of non-stationarity of any type, and structural breaks, without requiring data transformation for achieving stationarity, and is not sensitive to specification errors such as those in lag length selection. The empirical findings, based on both the bivariate as well as the multivariate frameworks, supported the conservation hypothesis, implying the existence of a unidirectional causality from economic growth to energy consumption. Keywords: Entropy, Bootstrap, Causality, Economic Growth, EnergyConsumption Pakistan, Citedy By: 7 The diagnosis of an electricity crisis and alternativeenergydevelopment inPakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: F Shaikh,Q Ji, Y Fan Journal: Renewable and SustainableEnergyReviews,Vol.52(),2015--Pages1172-1185 Abstract: The electricity sector in Pakistan is currently facing the formidable challenges of an insufficient installed capacity, a suboptimal infrastructure, circular debt and revenue shortage. All of these problems hamper socioeconomic activities. This paper diagnoses the overall condition of the electricity sector as well as the potential and recent progress in the implementation of alternative energy projects in the context of the targets set in the National Energy Security Plan (NESP). The assessment reveals the unsatisfactory overall progress of the implementation of the NESP in general and alternative energy in particular. We assess that if the short-term measures contained in the NESP have been adequately executed, were enough to bridge the existing electricity supply-demand gap and the country might not be facing an ongoing electricity crisis. Further, we investigated the specific alternative energy policy issues that hinder this sectors development in Pakistan. We conclude that fuel diversification by means of the maximum utilisation of alternative energy resources would help in solving the crisis and would also furnish the long-term energy needs of the country. Finally, we recommend a comprehensive strategy for revamping the electricity sector and developing the alternative energy resources needed to tackle the ongoing electricity crisis in Pakistan. Keywords: Electricity crisis, National energy security plan, Alternative energy, Policy issues, Feed-in tariff (FiT), Pakistan Citedy By: 7 Technological review on solar PV inPakistan: Scope, practices and recommendations for optimized system design [PDF] researchgate.net Author: HA Khan,S Pervaiz Journal: Renewable and SustainableEnergyReviews,Vol.23(),2013--Pages147-154 Abstract: Due to increasing fossil fuel prices and their limited availability, the global energy focus is shifting towards renewable resources. However, the uptake of these resources by Pakistan is rather slow. Various factors such as political interference, social unacceptability and economic barriers are deterring the widespread use of these resources. In addition, there is a consensus in the literature that technological knowledge of solar PV in Pakistan is limited at best. Many studies have indicated technological shortcomings as one of the major barriers in PV growth, however very little or no work has been reported which could actually address these issues. This paper reviews the current state of affairs in solar PV with a focus towards the technological shortcomings. We highlight various inefficient practices in the system design which lead to un-optimized and unreliable systems, thus contributing towards the lack of social acceptability of PV. We also propose several modifications that should be added to the design process of such systems to make them more accurate and reliable. Conforming to proper design methodologies and detailed understanding of technological aspects will go a long way in making PV grow in Pakistan. Keywords: Renewables, PV, Pakistan Citedy By: 34 Prospects for secure and sustainable electricity supply forPakistan [PDF] tawanai.com Author: T Muneer,M Asif Journal: Renewable and SustainableEnergyReviews,Vol.11(4), 2007--Pages654-671 Abstract: Fossil fuel reserves are diminishing rapidly across the world, intensifying the stress on existing reserves day-by-day due to increased demand. Not only that, fossil fuels, presently contributing to 80% of world primary energy, are inflicting enormous impacts on environment. Energy sector has a key role in this regard since energy during its production, distribution and consumption is responsible for producing environmentally harmful substances. There is an urgent need for a quicker switch over of energy systems from conventional to renewables that are sustainable and can meet the present and projected world energy demand. Hydrogen, in the capacity of energy vector and storage medium is expected to be the optimum solution for intermittency and storage of energy produced by renewables. Within the context of Pakistan solar and wind power are two of the most promising renewable In this article, the current energy consumption for Pakistan is presented and the issue of security of electrical energy supply is discussed. Furthermore, the prospects for a large-scale switch over to renewables are also addressed and the relevant economies and underpinning rationale provided. It has been found that solar energy is a much more economical choice for Pakistan as compared to wind energy-respective costs for solar and wind energy are (US cents/kWh) 20 and 77. This is due to the fact barring the four monsoon months, the average wind speed for the remaining 8 months does not cross an economic threshold. On the contrary, it was found that solar energy has a fairly stable and consistent availability. Keywords: Sustainability, Renewables, Solar energy, Wind power, Photovoltaic, Hydrogen, Pakistan Citedy By: 18 Monthly average daily global beam and diffuse solar radiation and its correlation with hours of bright sunshine for Karachi,Pakistan [PDF] academia.edu Author: F Ahmad,SMA Burney, SA Husain Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.1(1),1991--Pages115-118 Abstract: Correlation equations have been developed to obtain the monthly average of daily global, beam and diffuse solar radiation at Karachi, Pakistan from the fraction of maximum possible sunshine hours. The global, beam and diffuse solar radiation estimated via these equations are then compared with the measured values with excellent agreement. Diffuse and beam radiation can be estimated even in the absence of global radiation. Keywords: Citedy By: 23 An adaptive approach to the thermal comfort of office workers in North WestPakistan [PDF] Author: Rev.M.A.Humphreys Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.5( 58),1994--Pages985-992 Abstract: From a field survey of the thermal comfort of 100 office workers in Mingora and Peshawar, in the North West Frontier Province of Pakistan, it is shown that their responses conform to the Adaptive Model of thermal comfort. The people were comfortable at the seasonal mean indoor temperatures prevailing in their offices in spite of a large winter-summer difference. This adaptability was chiefly due to the flexibility of their traditional clothing. The ASHRAE thermal comfort standard does not fit the responses of the people, and more suitable indoor temperatures could be established on the Adaptive Model. Using such an approach would consume less energy for the heating and cooling of buildings than would the implementation of the ASHRAE Standard, which underestimated the tolerance to cold in winter and to heat in summer. Keywords: Thermal comfort, Pakistan, Offices, Adaptive Model,Clothing, Field-Study Citedy By: 32 Study of economic viability of photovoltaic electric power for QuettaPakistan [PDF] Author: A Khalid, H Junaidi Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.50(),2013--Pages253-258 Abstract: This study assess the feasibility of photovoltaic based power plant; for this purpose best site for the location of the project is determined by comparing monthly average daily global solar radiation data of eight Pakistani cities and Quetta city is chosen for the 10MW plant. RETScreen simulation of the power plant shows that about 23.206GWh of electricity can be generated in a year if one axis tracking method is employed. At a total cost of $50m, 50% debt ratio, 9% discount rate the proposed PV plant generates electricity at a rate of $0.157/kWh. The investigation shows that presently the PV based electricity is about 30.8% more expensive as compared to grid supplied electricity. Emission analysis demonstrated that the proposed PV power plant avoided carbon dioxide production by 17,938tons/year. The analysis shows that presently the proposed PV power plant is not feasible if only economic factors are considered. Sensitivity analysis demonstrates that if total installed cost of the plant is about $35m then the cost of power from photovoltaic plant will be equal to grid supplied electric power without any subsidy. Keywords: Solar energy, Photovoltaic, Feasibility analysis, RETScreen Citedy By: Solar assisted, pre-cooled hybrid desiccant cooling system forPakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: A Khalid, M Mahmood,M Asif,T Muneer Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.34(1),2009--Pages151-157 Abstract: This work presents results of experimental and simulation study of a solar assisted pre-cooled hybrid desiccant cooling (PHDCS) system for air conditioning applications in Pakistan. Tests were conducted on a gas fired pre-cooled hybrid desiccant cooling test rig for high humidity Karachi weather. Using measured data sets from the test rig, validation of TRYNSIS model of the same cooling system was undertaken. Four modes or configurations of the cooling system were simulated for Karachi and Lahore climatic conditions. Lahore simulation results demonstrated that better COPp can be achieved using indirect evaporative cooler for pre-cooling and direct evaporative cooler for post-cooling of air. Life cycle assessment of solar air collector was performed and energy and environmental payback periods were found to be equal to 1 and 1.5 years, respectively. An economic assessment of the solar collector revealed a payback period of about 14 years. Keywords: Solar energy, Desiccant cooling system, TRNSYS simulation, Life cycle assessment, Pakistan Citedy By: 0 Statistical analysis of measured global insolation data forPakistan [PDF] Author: IA Raja, JW Twidell Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.4(2),1994--Pages199-216 Abstract: The global insolation data for up to 15 years from six locations in Pakistan are analysed. In addition to simple arithmetic analysis, tables and figures of cumulative frequency distribution and number of consecutive days above certain threshold insolation values are constructed. Results are presented for monthly and annual periods for pratical application when planning solar installation. Keywords: Global Isolation, solar installation, Pakistan Citedy By: 14 Development of benchmark wind speed for Gharo and Jhimpir,Pakistan [PDF] docsdrive.com renewableresources.com.pk Author: IA Mirza, NA Khan, N Memon Journal: Renewable Energy,Vol.35(3),2010--Pages576-582 Abstract: This paper deals with the development of benchmark wind speed values for different regions at different height levels in Gharo Keti bandar wind corridor in the south of Pakistan. Unavailability of reliable long term historical wind data had made many uncertainties to project development activities because of unsteady nature of wind. This situation has resulted in realizing the importance of development of the benchmark wind speed values for the development of wind energy sector in Pakistan. Thus Government of Pakistan has introduced an innovative concept of Wind Risk by guaranteeing the wind speeds as given in benchmark wind speed table and has consequently diluted the financial risks of project developers involved in execution of wind power projects in Pakistan. Developing countries that do not have long term wind data, can be benefited from this study to establish wind energy in their country on fast track basis by pursuing same path. This will lead to the creation of new wind energy markets in the world. Keywords: Wind speed benchmarking, Wind risk,Pakistan wind energy program, Wind speed south of Pakistan Citedy By: 15 Stochastic modeling and generation of synthetic sequences of hourly global solar irradiation at Quetta,Pakistan [PDF] Author: L Kamal, YZ Jafri Journal: Renewable Energy ,Vol.18(4),1999--Pages56-572 Abstract: Using hourly global radiation data at Quetta, Pakistan for 10 yr, an Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA) process is fitted. Markov Transition Matrices have also been developed. These models are used for generating synthetic sequences for hourly radiations in MJ/m2and that the generated sequences are compared with the observed data. We found the MTM approach relatively better as a simulator compared to ARMA modeling. Keywords: Stochastic modeling, solar irradiation,Quetta,Pakistan Citedy By: 15 Techno-economical evaluation of windenergypotential and analysis of power generation from wind at Gharo, SindhPakistan, [PDF] researchgate.net Author: SF Khahro, K Tabbassum, AM Soomro Journal: Renewable Energy ,Vol.35(),2014--Pages460-474 Abstract: Renewable sources of energy are more favorable these days because these are environment friendly with zero emissions as compared to conventional energy sources. Wind energy is most rapidly growing, among several renewable energy sources, worldwide. The prime objective of this paper is to analyze and evaluate the wind energy characteristics and wind power potential at Gharo Sindh Pakistan. Five years wind data from Jan 2003 to Dec 2007, measured at 30m height, has been considered in this study. The mean wind speed is more than 5m/s for every year. The most probable wind speed is 9.356m/s while the wind speed carrying maximum energy is 11.43m/s. the highest value of standard deviation is 3.561m/s and the lowest value is determined as 1.587m/s for wind speed data at Gharo. The Weibull shape and scale parameters in the ranges from 1.291 to 4.569 and from 2.377m/s to 9.727m/s respectively. The wind power and energy densities are more than 260W/m2and 2300kW/m2respectively. The comparison of wind power densities calculated though measured wind data and calculated using Weibull and Rayleigh functions is also carried in this study. The direction of wind at Gharo is westerly for almost all five year. The assessment for power generation, from wind data collected at Gharo, through wind turbines of different manufacturers has been carried out. The GE45.7 wind turbine generates high annual energy of 11.220GWh with capacity factor of 0.56. The economic analysis using these wind turbines, for power generation, gave an estimated cost of US$0.0255 per kWh of energy from GE45.7 wind turbine. The technical and economic analysis of wind data collected at Gharo, Sindh shows that this site has apt wind energy potential and hence is suitable for development of wind power generation projects. Keywords: Wind energy, Most probable wind, Weibull distribution, Rayleigh distribution, Wind power density Economic analysis, Pakistan. Citedy By: 16 Application of geostationary satellite data for determining solar radiations overPakistan [PDF] Author: AQ Malik, A Mufti, HW Hiser, NT Veziroglu, L Kazi Journal: Renewableenergy,Vol.1(34),1991--Pages455-461 Abstract: New and improved models using computer simulation techniques based on the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite cloud imagery have been developed in order to monitor solar radiation measurements useful for a developing country like Pakistan. The digital data utilized has been obtained from the INSAT satellite in visible spectrum. Keywords: Computer simulation techniques, geostationary satellite data, solar radiations, Pakistan Citedy By: 10 Assessment of centralized grid connected wind power cost in coastal area ofPakistan [PDF] Author: K Harijan,MA Uqaili, M Memon, UK Mirza Journal: RenewableEnergy,Vol.34(2),2009--Pages369-373 Abstract: This work presents an assessment of per unit cost of electricity generated from 15MW wind farm at 40 locations in the coastal areas of Pakistan using the method of net present value analysis. The Nordex N43/600 wind turbine has been selected and used as reference wind turbine. Wind duration curves were developed and utilized to calculate per unit cost of electricity generated from chosen wind turbine. In Sindh province, the minimum cost of electricity generated was found to be 4.2 /kWh at Jamshoro, while the corresponding maximum was 7.4 /kWh at Kadhan site. In Balochistan, the minimum cost of electricity generated was found to be 6.3 /kWh at Aghore, while the corresponding maximum was 21.0 /kWh at Mand site. The study concludes that at most of the locations especially in Sindh province, wind power is competitive to conventional grid connected thermal power even without considering the externalities. Keywords: Cost of wind power, Wind duration curve, Wind farm, Coastal area, Pakistan, Citedy By: 18 Cumulative frequency distribution of solar insolation at Quetta,Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: SZ Ilyas, M Anwar, SM Nasir Journal: Renewableenergy,Vol.20(1), 2000--Pages83-86 Abstract: An inverse Gaussian relationship between percentage cumulative frequency and energy (in MJ/m2/day) is obtained from solar insolation data of Quetta, Pakistan. Keywords: solar insolation, Cumulative frequency distribution Pakistan, Quetta Citedy By: 11 Natural radioactivity from the building materials used in Islamabad and Rawalpindi,Pakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: M Tufail,N Ahmad,SM Mirza,NM Mirza Journal: Science of The Total Environment,Vol.121(),1992--Pages283-291 Abstract: Studies have been carried out to determine the natural radioactivity in the building materials used for construction of dwellings in Islamabad and Rawalpindi, Pakistan. The measurements have been carried out on samples of bricks, cement, gravel aggregates, sand, soil and paints using a HPGe based gamma-ray spectrometer. In all the materials40K,226Ra and232Th have been found; in paints activity was below the detectable limits. The overall activity (sum of activities) from40K,226Ra and232Th in brick and soil samples was the highest and the lowest was found in gravel aggregate samples. The average activity of40K varies from 51.3 3.8 Bq kg-1(gravel aggregates) to 631.2 6.5 Bq kg-1(bricks);226Ra varied from 21.5 0.5 Bq kg-1(sand) to 43.2 0.6 Bq kg-1(bricks);232Th varied from 9.9 0.6 Bq kg-1(gravel aggregates) to 56.2 1.7 Bq kg-1(soil). Radium equivalent activities with external and internal hazard indices have been also determined. The maximum value for the radium equivalent activity, 206.35 Bq kg-1, was found in soil, but it is less than the permitted value of 370 Bq Kg-1. All the materials have values for both external and internal hazard indices of < 1. Keywords: natural radioactivity, building materials, exposure, radiation hazard indices, Pakistan Citedy By: 56 Solar radiation overPakistanComparison of measured and predicted data [PDF] Author: MB Sukhera,MAR Pasha, MS Naveed Journal: Solar & Wind Technology,Vol.3(3),1986--Pages219-221 Abstract: Correlation constantsaandbof the well-known ngstrom correlation for five meteorological stations in Pakistan were determined. Measurements of the monthly average global solar irradiance on a horizontal surface at these stations were compared with predicted data. The agreement between their yearly averages is less than 5%. Keywords: Solar radiation, Pakistan, ngstrom correlation Citedy By: 12 Distribution of global insolation overPakistan [PDF] Author: A Raja, JW Twidell Journal: Solar Energy,Vol.43(6),1989--Pages355-357 Abstract: There are only five observatories measuring global insolation in Pakistan, which cannot represent the solar climate of the country. However, 37 observatories, distributed fairly well over the entire country, record sunshine. Therefore, insolation-sunshine empirical equations are developed to estimate global insolation over Pakistan. Three neighbouring observatories for which the insolation/sunshine records are available are also included in the study. Monthly and yearly maps are constructed, for daily global insolation, based on data for 40 locations. The isolines are compared with results obtained in India and with world solar insolation maps. Keywords: solar energy, Pakistan, global isolation Citedy By: Diurnal variation of global insolation over five locations inPakistan [PDF] Author: IA Raja, JW Twidell Journal: Solar Energy ,Vol.44(2),1990--Pages73-76 Abstract: The diurnal variation of global insolation at five locations in Pakistan is presented in terms of monthly averages of hourly sums. Isopleth diagrams for each station are prepared. These are nearly symmetric about the midday point. On the average, about 70% of the day's total insolation is received between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. local apparent time. The midday intensity, maximum during summer, exceeds 3 MJ m-2h-1at Quetta, which receives the highest values. Keywords: Citedy By: 0 Economic growth andenergyconsumption nexus inPakistan [PDF] emeraldinsight.com Author: W Ahmed, K Zaman, S Taj, R Rustam Journal: South Asian Journal of Global Business Research,Vol.(),--Pages- Abstract: This study aims to examine the relationship between electricity consumption per capita (ELEC) and real per capita income (Y), as the direction of causation of this relationship remains controversial in the existing literature. It also seeks to explore the relationship between energy consumption per capita (ENC) and real per capita income, over a 34-year period (between 1975 and 2009) Design/methodology/approachThe study uses Johansen co-integration technique to determine the short- and long-run relationship between the variables. The authors also utilize Granger causality test to determine the causal relationship between the selected variables. FindingsThe study provides evidence of bi-directional causality between the electricity consumption per capita and real per capita income on one hand; and energy consumption per capita and real per capita income on the other hand as the direction of causality has significant policy implications. Research limitations/implicationsThis study does not include all dimensions of the energy growth, but is limited to the three variables which the authors consider to be critical to economic development, including energy consumption, electricity consumption and economic growth. Originality/valueThe study uses a sophisticated econometric technique with additional tests of forecasting framework to examine the effect of energy demand on economic growth over a period of the next ten years, i.e. 2010-2019, in the context of Pakistan. The impulse response describes the reaction of the system as a function of independent variable that parameterizes the dynamic behavior of the system. Keywords: Economic growth,Energy consumption,Pakistan Citedy By: 15 The China-PakistanStrategic Relationship: Trade, Investment,Energyand Infrastructure [PDF] Author: S Kumar Journal: Strategic Analysis,Vol.31(5),--Pages- Abstract: The traditional Sino-Pakistan friendship of 55 years now has a new objectiveto improve the economic content of their relationship, which comprises trade, investment and energy co-operation within a bilateral framework. The result of this determination to implement the new economic agenda is visible in the quantum of Chinese investment in Pakistan. However, there are indications that the trade agenda be too ambitious or needs a larger restructuring of the Pakistani economy that will take time since it requires implementation of policy changes combined with participation in these initiatives from the business community of Pakistan. While investment primarily benefits Pakistan, trade provides China access to a new market for its goods. It will eventually do the same for Pakistan. Energy co-operation will benefit China as it will gain access to energy supplies through Gwadar port, an alternate route to the one through the Malacca straits, and will serve to develop its western regions. Pakistan has in turn gained from the large-scale infrastructure development that has taken place in Gwadar and will continue to do so once future plans make headway. Keywords: China-Pakistan,Strategic Relationship, Trade, Investment,Energy Citedy By: 9 An Edible Energy Return on Investment (EEROI) Analysis of Wheat and Rice in Pakistan [PDF] mdpi.com Author: Ali S. Prachaand Timothy A. Volk Journal: Sustainability2011,Vol.3(12),--Pages2358-2391 Abstract: Agriculture is the largest sector of Pakistan's economy, contributing almost 22% to the GDP and employing almost 45% of the total labor force. The two largest food crops, wheat and rice, contribute 3.1% and 1.4% to the GDP, respectively. The objective of this research was to calculate the energy return on investment (EROI) of these crops on a national scale from 1999 to 2009 to understand the size of various energy inputs and to discuss their contributions to the energy output. Energy inputs accounted for within the cropping systems included seed, fertilizer, pesticide, human labor, tractor diesel, irrigation pump electricity and diesel, the transport of fertilizer and pesticide, and the embodied energy of tractors and irrigation pumps. The largest per-hectare energy inputs to wheat were nitrogen fertilizer (52.6%), seed (17.9%), and tractor diesel (9.1%). For rice, the largest per-hectare energy inputs were nitrogen fertilizer (32%), tube well diesel (19.8%), and pesticide (17.6%). The EROI of wheat showed a gradual downward trend between 2000 and 2006 of 21.3%. The trend was erratic thereafter. Overall, it ranged from 2.7 to 3.4 with an average of 2.9 over the 11-year study period. The overall trend was fairly consistent compared to that of rice which ranged between 3.1 and 4.9, and averaged 3.9. Rice's EROI dipped sharply in 2002, was erratic, and remained below four until 2007. It rose sharply after that. As energy inputs increased, wheat outputs increased, but rice outputs decreased slightly. Rice responded to inputs with greater output and an increase in EROI. The same was not true for wheat, which showed little change in EROI in the face of increasing inputs. Th is suggests that additional investments of energy in rice production are not improving yields but for wheat, these investments are still generating benefits. The analysis shows quantitatively how fossil energy is a key driver of the Pakistani agricultural system as it traces direct and indirect energy inputs to two major food crops. Keywords: energy return on investment; per-hectare energy usage; wheat/rice output energy; wheat/rice input energy, Pakistan Citedy By: Dynamics of circular debt inPakistanand its resolution [PDF] 121.52.153.178 Author: Syed Sajid Ali;Sadia Badar Journal: The Lahore Journal of Economics ,Vol.15(),2010--Pages- Abstract: This paper examines the circular debt problem in the Pakistani energy sector. After presenting the profile of the energy sector in Pakistan, the paper explains why circular debt has emerged in the sector. Two principal reasons are discussed for the circular debt problem: First, consumer tariffs were insufficient to recover the rising costs of power generation and the government (due to fiscal constraints) was not compensating PEPCO for the resulting losses. Second, PEPCO has faced significant problems in recovering dues from consumers. In order to resolve the circular debt problem, sharp adjustments in power tariffs be required combined with the need by the government to explicitly recognize the costs of power subsidies in the budget. Keywords: circular debt, Energy sector, Pakistan Citedy By: 19 The impact of municipal solid waste treatment methods on greenhouse gas emissions in Lahore,Pakistan, [PDF] purclhr.co.nf Author: SA Batool, MN Chuadhry Journal: Waste Management,Vol.29(1),2009--Pages63-69 Abstract: The contribution of existing municipal solid waste management to emission of greenhouse gases and the alternative scenarios to reduce emissions were analyzed for Data Ganj Bukhsh Town (DGBT) in Lahore, Pakistan using the life cycle assessment methodology. DGBT has a population of 1,624,169 people living in 232,024 dwellings. Total waste generated is 500,000 tons per year with an average per capita rate of 0.84kg per day. Alternative scenarios were developed and evaluated according to the environmental, economic, and social atmosphere of the study area. Solid waste management options considered include the collection and transportation of waste, collection of recyclables with single and mixed material bank container systems (SMBCS, MMBCS), material recovery facilities (MRF), composting, biogasification and landfilling. A life cycle inventory (LCI) of the six scenarios along with the baseline scenario was completed; this helped to quantify the CO2equivalents, emitted and avoided, for energy consumption, production, fuel consumption, and methane (CH4) emissions. LCI results showed that the contribution of the baseline scenario to the global warming potential as CO2equivalents was a maximum of 838,116 tons. The sixth scenario had a maximum reduction of GHG emissions in terms of CO2equivalents of 33,773 tons, but the most workable scenario for the current situation in the study area is scenario 5. It saves 25% in CO2equivalents compared to the baseline scenario. Keywords: municipal solid waste treatment, greenhouse gas emissions, Lahore,Pakistan Citedy By: 59 Economic potential of recycling business in Lahore,Pakistan [PDF] docshare.tips Author: SA Batool, N Chaudhry, K Majeed Waste management, 2008 Journal: WasteManagement,Vol.28(2),2008--Pages294-298 Abstract: The state of household waste recycling in Lahore city, Pakistan with a population of 7.2 million was analyzed. Data on solid waste recycling were gathered from residents of low-, middle- and high-income groups, as well as from scavengers and junkshops. The recycling activities in Lahore exert a significant impact on resource conservation, creation of jobs, provision of economic opportunity and reduction in the magnitude of waste disposal problems. A cost analysis is presented to show the income that can be generated through a well-planned recycling program. It is shown that 21.2% of all recyclable waste in Lahore is recycled, and it generates an amount of Rs. 271million (US$4.5million) per year through the informal sector. However, if the recycling practice is owned by the formal sector, it can save an amount of Rs. 65million by reducing the collection cost. If recycling is adopted as an industry, it can generate revenues of Rs. 530million (US$8.8million) per year and can also save enormous amount of energy, as well as the natural resources. Keywords: recycling business, Pakistan, economics, solid wastes, Citedy By: 52 Energyuse in large-scale irrigated agriculture in the Punjab province ofPakistan [PDF] researchgate.net Author: A Siddiqi, JL Wescoat Jr Journal: Water international,Vol.38( 5:),2013--Pages- Abstract: Pakistans Indus Basin irrigation system, conceived initially as a vast network of gravity-fed canals, has evolved into a quasi-conjunctive management system in which pumped groundwater increasingly augments surface water supplies. Analysis of the evolution of on-farm energy use for agriculture in Punjab Province over the last 15 years finds that while total crop production increased 31%, direct energy intensity for agriculture increased 80%. Moreover, direct energy use is chiefly driven by groundwater pumping (61%). Important knowledge gaps are identified in the critical water-energy-food interdependencies that need to be addressed for sustainable management of scarce natural resources in Pakistan. Keywords: energy,irrigation,groundwater,agricultural productivity,resource use efficiency,Pakistan,Indus Citedy By: 11 A Legally Binding Agreement (LBA) - Growing Need for Air Pollution Reduction and Control in South Asia [PDF] https://www.sdpi.org/publications/files/policy%20Brief%2027.pdf Author: Mahmood A.Khwaja and Faisal Haq Shaheen Journal: Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI),Vol.(),2019--Pages1-6 Abstract: With increasing urbanization and economic growth, air pollution is becoming an urgent concern in South Asian countries. The study upon which this paper is based has been conducted at SDPI, to look into and discuss the socioeconomic situation of South Asia, the existing situation of air pollution in the countries/region and the responses, if any, of national governments to air pollution. Among others, the paper makes recommendations, including a legally binding agreement for South Asia (LBA-SA), for strengthening the framework for air pollution reduction at regional and national levels in South Asia. South Asian countries, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, have carried out a number of projects/ activities for the creation of a meaningful framework to limit air pollution. A greater participation of member states is required and a regional framework is needed for better understanding and cooperation among the member states, on issues relating to air pollution. An effective implementation of a regional framework with shared responsibilities towards air pollution reduction measures across the member countries is vital for sustained economical growth, protection of environment and to safeguard public health, especially of future generations, in the region. Keywords: . Citedy By: . Air Pollution Reduction and Control in South Asia [PDF] https://www.sdpi.org/publications/files/Air%20Pollution%20Reduction%20and%20Control%20in%20South%20Asia%20(W-121).pdf Author: Mahmood A. Khwaja, Faiqa Umer, Nazima Shaheen, Anusha Sherazi and Faisal Haq Shaheen Journal: Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI),Vol.(),2012--Pages1-23 Abstract: With increasing urbanization and economic growth, air pollution is becoming an urgent concern in South Asian countries Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. The objective of this study is to look into and discuss the socioeconomic situation of South Asia, the existing situation of air pollution in the countries of the region, its resulting health impacts on the population and the responses, if any, of national governments to combat air pollution. Among others the paper makes recommendation, including a legally binding agreement for South Asia (LBA-SA), for strengthening the framework for air pollution reduction at regional and national levels in South Asia. Keywords: . Citedy By: . Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Facilities - Advancing Research & Scientific Information Services Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Facilities PASTIC National Centre housed in its own Building with a network of Six Regional Centers (Karachi, Lahore, Peshawar, Faisalabad, Quetta & Muzaffarabad). National Science Reference Library Providing State of the Art Digital Services for the research scholars at PASTIC National Centre Islamabad. Literature Search facility for M.Phil & Ph.D. research scholars by providing copies of Research Articles (Abstracts/Full text), Reports, Conference Papers, Books or Book-chapters etc. published locally or abroad on specific topics free of cost through an online request. A well-equipped Computer Training Lab for holding IT trainings (30 persons) along with a team of experienced IT Professionals (Resource Persons) to manage and conduct IT-based trainings on latest Tools & Techniques (SPSS, Mendley, EndNote, Koha, e-Business Management, etc.) for young Researchers, Library Professionals, and Entrepreneurs. State-of-the-art Printing Facility for composing, designing, plate making, offset printing, binding, folding, etc. for Printing of books, Pamphlets, Brochures, Journals, Newsletters, Cards, Folders, etc. These facilities are not only used for printing of PASTIC publications but are also extended to all other S&T and R&D Organizations. Availability of in-house indigenous S&T/R&D and Industry Databases (online). Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Fresh Arrivals - National Science Reference Library Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Fresh Arrivals at National Science Reference Library Fresh Arrivals of 2025 VOL.21 NO.1 -Jan -2025 Fresh Arrivals of 2024 VOL.20 NO.1 -Jan -2024 VOL.20 NO.8 -Aug -2024 VOL.20 NO.9 -Sep -2024 VOL.20 NO.7 -Jul -2024 VOL.20 NO.2 -Feb -2024 VOL.20 NO.3 -Mar -2024 VOL.20 NO.5 -May -2024 VOL.20 NO.10 -Oct -2024 VOL.20 NO.11 -Nov -2024 VOL.20 NO.12 -Dec -2024 Fresh Arrivals of 2023 VOL.19 NO.1 -Jan -2023 VOL.19 NO.2 -Feb -2023 VOL.19 NO.3 -Mar -2023 VOL.19 NO.4 -Apr -2023 VOL.19 NO.5 -May -2023 VOL.19 NO.6 -Jun -2023 VOL.19 NO.7 -Jul -2023 VOL.19 NO.8 -Aug -2023 VOL.19 NO.9 -Sep -2023 VOL.19 NO.10 -Oct -2023 VOL.19 NO.11 -Nov -2023 Fresh Arrivals of 2022 VOL.18 NO.1 -Jan -2022 VOL.18 NO.4 -Apr -2022 VOL.18 NO.5 -May -2022 VOL.18 NO.6 -Jun -2022 VOL.18 NO.10 -Oct -2022 VOL.18 NO.12 -Dec -2022 VOL.18 NO.8 -Aug -2022 VOL.18 NO.11 -Nov -2022 VOL.18 NO.7 -Jul -2022 VOL.18 NO.2 -Feb -2022 VOL.18 NO.3 -Mar -2022 Fresh Arrivals of 2021 VOL.17 NO.5 -May -2021 VOL.17 NO.1 -Jan -2021 VOL.17 NO.2 -Feb -2021 VOL.17 NO.6 -Jun -2021 VOL.17 NO.7 -Jul -2021 VOL.17 NO.3 -Mar -2021 VOL.17 NO.4 -Apr -2021 Fresh Arrivals of 2020 VOL.16 NO.1 -Jan -2020 VOL.16 NO.2 -Feb -2020 VOL.16 NO.3 -Mar -2020 VOL.16 NO.11 -Nov -2020 Fresh Arrivals of 2019 VOL.15 NO.1 -Jan -2019 VOL.15 NO.2 -Feb -2019 VOL.15 NO.3 -Mar -2019 VOL.15 NO.4 -Apr -2019 VOL.15 NO.5 -May -2019 VOL.15 NO.8 -Aug -2019 VOL.15 NO.9 -Sep -2019 VOL.15 NO.10 -Oct -2019 VOL.15 NO.11 -Nov -2019 VOL.15 NO.12 -Dec -2019 Fresh Arrivals of 2018 VOL.14 NO.10 -Oct -2018 VOL.14 NO.11 -Nov -2018 VOL.14 NO.9 -Sep -2018 VOL.14 NO.1 -Jan -2018 VOL.14 NO.2 -Feb -2018 VOL.14 NO.3 -Mar -2018 VOL.14 NO.4 -Apr -2018 VOL.14 NO.5 -May -2018 VOL.14 NO.8 -Aug -2018 VOL.14 NO.12 -Dec -2018 Fresh Arrivals of 2017 VOL.13 NO.1 -Jan -2017 VOL.13 NO.7 -Jul -2017 VOL.13 NO.9 -Sep -2017 VOL.13 NO.10 -Oct -2017 VOL.13 NO.8 -Aug -2017 VOL.13 NO.11 -Nov -2017 VOL.13 NO.12 -Dec -2017 Fresh Arrivals of 2016 VOL.12 NO.1 -Jan -2016 VOL.12 NO.2 -Feb -2016 VOL.12 NO.3 -Mar -2016 VOL.12 NO.4 -Apr -2016 VOL.12 NO.5 -May -2016 VOL.12 NO.6 -Jun -2016 VOL.12 NO.7 -Jul -2016 VOL.12 NO.8 -Aug -2016 VOL.12 NO.9 -Sep -2016 VOL.12 NO.10 -Oct -2016 VOL.12 NO.11 -Nov -2016 VOL.12 NO.12 -Dec -2016 Fresh Arrivals of 2015 VOL.11 NO.1 -Jan -2015 VOL.11 NO.2 -Feb -2015 VOL.11 NO.3 -Mar -2015 VOL.11 NO.11 -May -2015 VOL.11 NO.4 -Apr -2015 VOL.11 NO.6 -Jun -2015 Archive - 2014 VOL.10 NO.1 -Jan -2014 VOL.10 NO.4 -Apr -2014 VOL.10 NO.2 -Feb -2014 VOL.10 NO.5 -May -2014 VOL.10 NO.3 -Mar -2014 VOL.10 NO.6 -Jun -2014 VOL.10 NO.7 -Jul -2014 VOL.10 NO.8 -Aug -2014 VOL.10 NO.9 -Sep -2014 VOL.10 NO.10 -Oct -2014 VOL.10 NO.11 -Nov -2014 VOL.10 NO.12 -Dec -2014 Archive - 2013 VOL.9 NO.8 -Aug -2013 VOL.9 NO.9 -Sep -2013 VOL.9 NO.10 -Oct -2013 VOL.9 NO.11 -Nov -2013 VOL.9 NO.1 -Jan -2013 VOL.9 NO.2 -Feb -2013 VOL.9 NO.3 -Mar -2013 VOL.9 NO.5 -May -2013 VOL.9 NO.6 -Jun -2013 VOL.9 NO.7 -Jul -2013 VOL.9 NO.12 -Dec -2013 VOL.9 NO.4 -Apr -2013 Archive - 2012 VOL.8 NO.1 -Jan -2012 VOL.8 NO.2 -Feb -2012 VOL.8 NO.4 -Apr -2012 VOL.8 NO.5 -May -2012 VOL.8 NO.6 -Jun -2012 VOL.8 NO.7 -Jul -2012 VOL.8 NO.8 -Aug -2012 VOL.8 NO.9 -Sep -2012 VOL.8 NO.10 -Oct -2012 VOL.8 NO.11 -Nov -2012 VOL.8 NO.12 -Dec -2012 Archive - 2011 VOL.7 NO.1 -Jan -2011 VOL.7 NO.3 -Mar -2011 VOL.7 NO.4 -Apr -2011 VOL.7 NO.5 -May -2011 VOL.7 NO.6 -Jun -2011 VOL.7 NO.7 -Jul -2011 VOL.7 NO.8 -Aug -2011 VOL.7 NO.9 -Sep -2011 VOL.7 NO.10 -Oct -2011 VOL.7 NO.11 -Nov -2011 VOL.7 NO.12 -Dec -2011 Archive - 2010 VOL.6 NO.4 -Jan -2010 VOL.6 NO.5 -Mar -2010 VOL.6 NO.6 -Jun -2010 VOL.6 NO.7 -Aug -2010 VOL.6 NO.8 -Sep -2010 VOL.6 NO.10 -Oct -2010 Note: Click on the linked heading text to expand or collapse accordion panels. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | History - Evolution of Scientific & Technological Information Services in Pakistan Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES History Information plays a fundamental role for Scientific, Technological and Economic development of a country. Realizing the importance of potential role that Scientific Information plays, government of Pakistan with the assistance of UNESCO established (1957) Pakistan National Scientific and Technical Documentation Centre (PANSDOC) under the Pakistan Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (PCSIR), Karachi to cater to the Scientific Community needs such as Procurement of Documents, Compilation of Bibliographies, Abstracting, Indexing and Technical Translations. An expanded project namely Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Centre (PASTIC) was launched (1974) around the nucleus of PANSDOC and was transferred from PCSIR to Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF), Islamabad. Presently, PASTIC is functioning as subsidiary of PSF, an autonomous organization under Ministry of Science & Technology. PASTIC is the premier organization in the field of S&T Information and is serving thousands of researchers and other professionals through its specialised information services. Scopes and facilities of PASTIC were expanded after transferring to PSF. PASTIC National Centre (Headquarter) is located in the premises of Quaid-i- Azam University Campus, Islamabad whereas its six Sub-Centers are located at Karachi, Lahore, Fasilabad, Peshawar, Muzaffarabad and Quetta. PASTIC is currently offering wide ranging services such as supply of full-text S&T Documents, publication of primary (Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information System-PJCIS) and Secondary Journals (Pakistan Science Abstracts in Ten(10) Disciplines), Patent Information Service, Bibliographic Information Service, development of indigenous S&T databases, compilation of Union Catalogues and Directories, National Science Reference Library, Printing Services (Reprographic) ranging from Mimeographing, Photocopying and Microfilming to printing. PASTIC is dedicated to fulfil the ever-growing needs of information community in the field of Science, Engineering and Technology for research and development activities at national level. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | International Liaison & Collaborations in Science & Technology Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES International Liaison Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center (PASTIC) is the premier organization for dissemination of Scientific and Technological Information to the Scientists, Researchers, Engineers, Entrepreneurs, Industry and Citizens of Pakistan. One of the important objectives of PASTIC is to develop collaborations with international information networks to harness new opportunities to access better information resources for its clients. Accordingly, PASTIC developed collaborations with following international Agencies/organizations: International Collaborations DSS MoU sighing between PASTIC with DSS (Department of Science Service, Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research, and Innovation, Bureau of Science and Technology Information Service, Thailand (In process). UNESCO PASTIC is designated as Secretariat for the IFAP National Committee (Pakistan) by UNESCO in Dec, 2018 BTBU PASTIC joined hands with Beijing Technology and Business University(BTBU), China and organized a series of online China Pakistan Science Workshops (July-September 2020) PASTIC is part of CPEC Science Communication Network launched on Dec 3, 2020 and collaborate with BTBU to organize activities in 2021 ISTIC Institute of Scientific and Technical Information Centre, China(ISTIC) (A delegation visited PASTIC on July 2, 2019 and MoU with ISTIC is under consideration) SAARC PASTIC as Lead Implementing Agency executed SDF funded project Networking and Capacity Building of Women Entrepreneurs (SMEs) from SAARC Countries in collaboration with 5 SAARC member Countries (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, Pakistan). Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES 110609 Records Pakistan Science Abstract 4683 Records Scientists Directory 10305 Records R&D PROJECT 708 Records Periodicals Directory 494 Records Climate Change Articles 3071 Records R&D equipment 83 Records S&T Societies/Associations 672 Records R&D/S&T ORGANIZATIONS 168 Records S & T Libraries 2853834 Records PakCat Latest News 2025-23-04 PASTIC advances innovation and research excellence at the 10th Invention to Innovation Summit 2025. Read more 2025-18-04 Visit of Chinese Delegation from Beijing Institute of Graphics and Communication to PASTIC National Center Read more 2025-04-02 National Scientists Directory (NSD) portal is now live! Read more 2025-01-04 PASTIC organized an intensive three-day training workshop on SPSS Read more 2025-02-02 PASTIC successfully organized an intensive three-day training workshop on SPSS Read more 2024-12-16 PASTIC organized three days training workshop SPSS Read more 2025-04-17 PASTIC successfully concludes 56th SPSS training workshop Read more 2023-12-09 One day training activity on Open Journal Management System for Punjab region at Government College University Faisalabad (GCUF) Read more All News Picture Gallery Seminar on Digital Libraries: Trends, Challenges.. 10th Invention to Innovation Summit 2025 PASTIC-UAF STEM & IT INNOVATION EXPO at Faisalabad" Christmas celebration at PASTIC National Centre, Islamabad Training workshop on data journalism 17th November 20121 PASTIC HEC MoU 19-05-2021 - Invitation to collaborate Recruitment test conducted by PASTIC National Centre, Islamabad SAARC WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS PORTAL 2-Days consultative meeting Inaugration ceremony of Short term & Attachment training Chairman PSF Prof. Dr. Shahid Mahmood Baig Visited PASTIC Launching Ceremony "CPEC Science Communication Network" Publications COLLABORATIONS National International Notification on 3-Days Training on SPSS **************** 3 Days SPSS Training at PASTIC National Center QAU campus, Islamabad has been postponed due to possible campus access issues in next 3 days in Islamabad. The new dates will be announced as soon as possible. Please contact Mr. Junaid Khan (0323-8404209, 051-9248111) for any queries in this regard. Registration Fee: RS 3000 Register Now Sub-Centres Lahore Karachi Peshawar Quetta Faisalabad Muzaffarabad Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Job Opportunities Date/Title Details Application Form Job Opportunities at Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center (PASTIC) Dated 06 Feb 2021 Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Latest News & Updates - Scientific & Research Activities in Pakistan Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES News Archive : 2010 Back To Latest News Archives 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 News PASTIC Services Awareness Seminar at Pakistan Forest Institute Peshawar on December 21, 2010 Release Date:21/12/2010 PASTIC Sub Centre, Karachi organized PASTIC Services Seminar at Baqai Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences Karachi on December 8, 2010 Release Date:08/12/2010 PASTIC Sub Centre Peshawar participated in Conference on Materials Processing, Characterization, Properties and their Economic Potential Release Date:01/12/2010 PASTIC and its subcenteres organized services stall at different locations through out the country on Word Science Day on 10 November 2010 Release Date:10/11/2010 PASTIC, IRP and LCCI organized a Symposium entitled "Building Effective Coordination between R&D and Industry for Enhancing Innovations, Competitiveness and Productivity of Indigenous Technologies" on October 30, 2010 at Lahore Chamber of Commerce and Industry Release Date:30/10/2010 PASTIC National Centre arranged a stall at National Institute of Psychology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad on 24th September 2010 Release Date:24/09/2010 Report on PSF Flood Relief Activities in Flood Affected Areas from 20th Aug to 7th Sep 2010 Release Date:07/09/2010 Peshawar Sub Center participated in fund raising campaign for flood affected people under the supervision of honorable federal Minister for Science & Technology Mr. Azam Khan Swati on Sep 04, 2010 Release Date:04/09/2010 PASTIC sub centre Peshawar participated in Three-Day International Symposium, Basic Techniques in Research, Dissertation and Paper Writing in Life Sciences at HAZARA University on July 27, 2010 Release Date:27/07/2010 PASTIC sub centre Peshawar organized PASTIC Services Seminar at ABASYN University Peshawar Release Date:21/07/2010 >PASTIC Annual Review Meeting held at National Centre Release Date:09/07/2010 Secretary S&T Mr. K.B. Rind has inaugurated the PASTIC Automated Information Dissemination Service Release Date:09/07/2010 PASTIC organized a 2 Days Training Workshop on Project Management at RCCI, Rawalpindi Release Date:06/07/2010 PASTIC signed an MoU with RCCI, Rawalpindi Release Date:11/06/2010 PASTIC signed an MoU with IRP, Lahore Release Date:03/06/2010 Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Research Article & Document Supply Request Form - Access Research Papers Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Bibliographic/Document Supply Request form Literature is a term used frequently in academic and library circles which means "the stuff that's been published on a topic". If you are interested in the acquisition of research papers/articles please submit this form. All fields are required. Name: * Gender: * Choose Male Female Status: * Choose Student Faculty Staff Qualification: * Choose BS MSC MS/Mphil Ph.D Post.doc Other If Student, Name of Supervisor: * Institution/University: * Department: * Cell No: * Email: * Discipline: * Choose Agricultural Sciences Animal Sciences Applied Sciences Biological Sciences Chemical Sciences Computer Sciences Earth Sciences Economics Education Engineering Sciences Environmental Sciences Geographical Sciences Geological Sciences Humanities Industrial Technology Management Sciences Mathematical Sciences Medical Sciences Physics Plant Sciences Psychological Sciences Social Sciences Space Sciences Statistical Sciences Other Topic: * Keywords/Synonyms: * Human Check * Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Bibliographic & Document Supply Service - Research Access Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Bibliographic/Document Supply Service Bibliographic and document supply Service promotes local Research and Development (R&D) in the country through serving annually thousands of young scientists/researchers/engineers, technologists faculty members, R&D workers and & industry people. Under this service, copies of Research Articles (Abstracts/Full text) Reports, Conference Papers, Books or Book-chapters etc. published locally or abroad are provided free of cost and within no time to the clients. The request can be submitting through online Bibliographic/Document Supply Request form available on PASTIC Website Subscribed Databases(Discontinued) Applied Science & Technology Full Text Biological & Agricultural Index Plus Abstracts Social Sciences Full Text, Green FILE (free supplied by EBSCO) Library, Information Science & Technology Abstracts (free Access through HEC Digital Library, such as Science Direct, ASTM, Ebrary, IMF Ebrary, Springer E-books, Springer Links, Taylor & Frances Journals, Wiley Blackwell Journals, Chicago University Press, etc. Access through LEJ JSTOR, Science Direct, Science Finder & others Open Access Resources Google Scholar, Public Library of Science (PLoS), DOAJ etc. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Vision & Mission - Advancing Scientific & Technological Information Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Vision To be known as a leading organization of Scientific & Technological information resources for supporting Research & Development leading to sustainable socio-economic development in the country. Mission Committed to serve Scientific and Technological Information needs of R&D and Industrial Community through Anticipatory and Responsive Information Services. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES MoST Resources *This page is updated regularly. If you are unable to find a resource, please get back to this page after few days.. Ministry of Science and Technology (MoST) Publications Productive Scientists of Pakistan Year Books Year Book 2022-23 Year Book 2021-22 Year Book 2020-21 Final Year Book 2015-16 Final Year Book 2010-11 Misc S&T BIZ July-Sept 2017 THE PAKISTAN SCIENCE FOUNDATION ACT, 1973 S&T Biz April-June 2017 S&T Biz Jan-Mar 2017 S&T Biz Oct-Dec, 2016 S&T Biz Jul-Sept, 2016 Policies and Plans National Science Technology and Innovation Policy - 2022 Pakistan National Quality Policy - 2021 Laws THE NATIONAL METROLOGY INSTITUTE OF PAKISTAN ACT, 2022 THE COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD ACT, 2018 THE NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2018 THE PAKISTAN COUNCIL FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2017 THE PAKISTAN HALAL AUTHORITY ACT, 2016 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEANOGRAPHY ACT, 2007 THE NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY ACT, 1997 THE PAKISTAN STANDARDS AND QUALITY CONTROL AUTHORITY ACT, 1996 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ELECTRONICS ORDINANCE, 1979 THE PAKISTAN ENGINEERING COUNCIL ACT, 1975 THE PAKISTAN COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ACT, 1973 COMSATS Institute of Information Technology (CIIT) Publications Research Publications Misc SoPs for Degree Verification Process Agreement on Solar Power 300 KW Agreement on SSC Job Application Form Non-Faculty Eligibility Criteria (Non Faculty) Eligibility Criteria - Faculty Researchers Council for Work and Housing Research (CWHR) Publications Research Publications National Institute of Electronics (NIE) Publications Research Publications Pakistan Council for Science and Technology (PCST) Publications Misc. Publications Misc NGOs in Science and Technology Public Attitude towards Science & Technology - Outlook of Civil Servant Productive Scientists of Pakistan Misc. Technical Reports Technology Foresight Reports Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources (PCRWR) Annual Reports Annual Report 2015-16 Annual Report 2014-15 Annual Report 2013-14 Publications Publications on Water Management Publications on Water Quality Management Newsletters Latest Newsletters Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF) Newsletters PSF Newsletter - November-December 2022 (Vol.16 No.3) PSF Newsletter - September-October 2022 (Vol.16 No.2) PSF Newsletter - July-August 2022 (Vol.16 No.1) PSF Newsletter - December 2016 (Vol.14 No.12) PSF Newsletter - November 2016 (Vol.14 No.11) PSF Newsletter - October 2016 (Vol.14 No.10) PSF Newsletter - September 2016 (Vol.14 No.9) PSF Newsletter - August 2016 (Vol.14 No.8) PSF Newsletter - June 2016 (Vol.14 No.6) PSF Newsletter - May 2016 (Vol.14 No.5) PSF Newsletter - March 2016 (Vol.14 No.3) PSF Newsletter - February 2016 (Vol.14 No.2) PSF Newsletter - January 2016 (Vol.14 No.1) PSF Newsletter - December 2017(Vol.15 No.12) PSF Newsletter - November 2017(Vol.15 No.11) PSF Newsletter - October 2017(Vol.15 No.10) PSF Newsletter - September 2017(Vol.15 No.9) PSF Newsletter - August 2017(Vol.15 No.8) PSF Newsletter - July 2017(Vol.15 No.7) PSF Newsletter - June 2017(Vol.15 No.6) PSF Newsletter - May 2017(Vol.15 No.5) PSF Newsletter - April 2017(Vol.15 No.4) PSF Newsletter - March 2017(Vol.15 No.3) PSF Newsletter - February 2017(Vol.15 No.2) PSF Newsletter - January 2017(Vol.15 No.1) National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) Newsletters Experts call for reducing acidity in sea at World Oceans Day moot 10 Years and Sailing Along. A Journey that Matters Project Underway to check Sea Level Rise First China-Pakistan Oceanographic Expedition Sea intrusion threatens coastal areas of Sindh, Balochistan National Institute of Oceanography to initiate study on Karachi coast Public urged to reduce plastic use UN accepts Pakistan demand for extending sea limit to 350 nautical miles Pakistani & Chinese Scientists to Start Joint Expedition in the Arabian Sea Landmark achievement PAKISTAN IS INVITED FIRST TIME IN THE OUR OCEAN CONFERENCE IN SEPTEMBER 2016 IN USA Pak-China to deepen cooperation in Oceanography Pakistani, Chinese scientists to start joint oceanographic expedition in Arabian Sea China-Pakistan oceanographic expedition completes Sea intrusion, sinking of Indus delta threaten coastline 'Oil slick' on Karachi beach: Here's what the experts say Misc Employees Service Rules NIO ACT no. III Observance and Implementation of 2% Disability Quota NIO at a Glance NIO Brochure Biological Oceanography Brochure IPOL Brochure Tender Planning, 2020-21 Employees Pension Rules National University of Science and Technology (NUST) Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies (PCRET) Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR) Pakistan Engineering Council (PEC) Pakistan National Accreditation Council (PNAC) Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | PASTIC ORGANIZED AN INTENSIVE THREE-DAY TRAINING WORKSHOP ON SPSS - Latest News & Updates Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES PASTIC ORGANIZED AN INTENSIVE THREE-DAY TRAINING WORKSHOP ON SPSS << Back to News Release Date: 04/01/2025 Pakistan Science and Technology Information Centre (PASTIC) hosted an intensive three-day hands-on training workshop on Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) from 01 03 January, 2025, designed to empower researchers, students, and professionals with the necessary skills to effectively utilize SPSS software for advanced data analysis. Dr. Maryam Ibrar delivered the lecture as a Resource Person, and twenty-three (23) research scholars from Quaid-e-Azam University attended the training workshop. SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences) is a versatile and responsive program designed to undertake a range of statistical procedures. Its important to note that SPSS is not the only statistical software there are many others that you may come across if you pursue a career that requires you to work with data. Some of the other more common statistical packages include Stata and SAS (and there are many others). The focus for this session, however, was on SPSS. SPSS software is widely used in a range of disciplines, including marketing, education research, healthcare, and medical fields. Participants engaged in hands-on data analysis during the SPSS workshop. At the end of the training workshop, participants became familiar with SPSS presentation of statistical output and equipped themselves with the basic knowledge of How to conduct descriptive and Basic Inferential Statistics. PASTIC has a long-standing commitment to promoting scientific innovation and research in Pakistan. Through this workshop, the center continues its efforts to bridge the gap between theoretical knowledge and practical application, helping participants apply advanced tools and methodologies in their work. Group photo of the participants of the SPSS training workshop with Principal System Analyst, Mr. Saifullah Azim. Principal System Analyst, Mr. Saifullah Azim attended the closing session. He briefly introduced the different PASTIC services and explained the objective of organizing such training workshops. At the end of the session, Principal System Analyst, Mr. Saifullah Azim distributed the training certificates amongst the participants. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Newsletters - Latest Scientific Updates & Publications Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES PASTIC Newsletters 2025 February 2025 (Volume 8, Issue 2 ) Download PDF | Read Online January 2025 (Volume 8, Issue 2) Download PDF | Read Online 2024 November-December 2024 (Volume 7, Issue 11-12) Download PDF | Read Online September-October 2024 (Volume 7, Issue 9-10) Download PDF | Read Online August 2024 (Volume 7, Issue 8) Download PDF | Read Online July 2024 (Volume 7, Issue 7) Download PDF | Read Online June 2024 (Volume 7, Issue 6) Download PDF | Read Online May 2024 (Volume 7, Issue 5) Download PDF | Read Online March - April 2024 (Volume 7, Issue 3 - 4) Download PDF | Read Online January - February 2024 (Volume 7, Issue 1 - 2) Download PDF | Read Online 2023 December, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 12) Download PDF | Read Online November, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 11) Download PDF | Read Online October, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 10) Download PDF | Read Online September, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 09) Download PDF | Read Online August, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 08) Download PDF | Read Online July, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 07) Download PDF | Read Online June, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 06) Download PDF | Read Online May, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 05) Download PDF | Read Online April, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 04) Download PDF | Read Online March, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 03) Download PDF | Read Online February, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 02) Download PDF | Read Online January, 2023 (Volume 6, Issue 01) Download PDF | Read Online 2022 December, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 12) Download PDF | Read Online November, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 11) Download PDF | Read Online October, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 10) Download PDF | Read Online September, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 09) Download PDF | Read Online August, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 08) Download PDF | Read Online July, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 07) Download PDF | Read Online June, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 06) Download PDF | Read Online May, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 05) Download PDF | Read Online April, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 04) Download PDF | Read Online March, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 03) Download PDF | Read Online February, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 02) Download PDF | Read Online January, 2022 (Volume 5, Issue 01) Download PDF | Read Online 2021 December, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 12) Download PDF | Read Online November, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 11) Download PDF | Read Online October, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 10) Download PDF | Read Online September, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 09) Download PDF | Read Online August, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 08) Download PDF | Read Online July, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 07) Download PDF | Read Online June, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 06) Download PDF | Read Online May, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 05) Download PDF | Read Online April, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 04) Download PDF | Read Online March, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 03) Download PDF | Read Online February, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 02) Download PDF | Read Online January, 2021 (Volume 4, Issue 01) Download PDF | Read Online 2020 December, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 12) Download PDF | Read Online November, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 11) Download PDF | Read Online October, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 10) Download PDF | Read Online September, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 9) Download PDF | Read Online August, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 8) Download PDF | Read Online July, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 7) Download PDF | Read Online June, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 6) Download PDF | Read Online May, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 5) Download PDF | Read Online April, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 4) Download PDF | Read Online March, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 3) Download PDF | Read Online February, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 2) Download PDF | Read Online January, 2020 (Volume 3, Issue 1) Download PDF | Read Online 2019 December, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 12) Download PDF | Read Online November, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 11) Download PDF | Read Online October, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 10) Download PDF | Read Online September, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 9) Download PDF | Read Online August, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 8) Download PDF | Read Online July, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 7) Download PDF | Read Online June, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 6) Download PDF | Read Online May, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 5) Download PDF | Read Online April, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 4) Download PDF | Read Online March, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 3) Download PDF | Read Online February, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 2) Download PDF | Read Online January, 2019 (Volume 2, Issue 1) Download PDF | Read Online 2018 December, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 12) Download PDF | Read Online November, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 11) Download PDF | Read Online October, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 10) Download PDF | Read Online September, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 9) Download PDF | Read Online August, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 8) Download PDF | Read Online July, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 7) Download PDF | Read Online June, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 6) Download PDF | Read Online May, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 5) Download PDF | Read Online April, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 4) Download PDF | Read Online March, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 3) Download PDF | Read Online February, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 2) Download PDF | Read Online January, 2018 (Volume 1, Issue 1) Download PDF | Read Online Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | National Science Reference Library - Scientific & Research Resources Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES National Science Reference Library Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries Union Catalogue (Pak Cat) Books PASTIC-OPAC Union Catalogue (Journals) Fresh Arrivals Directory of Libraries Weblinks of Pakistani Libraries HEC Digital Library The National Science Reference Library is located at the PASTIC National Centre. The library serves the information needs of the research scholars and others seeking scientific literature. PASTIC Library is equipped with both Print and Electronic information resources. It has a collection of more than 8000 books; 900 titles of journals (300 journals regular among them) and approximately 5000 miscellaneous documents such as reference material/secondary sources, encyclopedias, government documents, conferences/seminars proceedings, etc. Automation of the library is underway. The HEC Digital library is also accessible at PASTIC. The library also organizes capacity-building programmes in the area of Library & Information Management, Library Automation, Digital Library, Soft Skills for Librarians, Information Literacy, etc. Main services are: Reference & Referral Services Reader Service Journal Listings Photocopying & Scanning Services Free WIFI access Library Project Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors National Library OPAC Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Objectives - Advancing Scientific & Technological Information Services Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Objectives Develop a National S&T/R&D Information Repository of indigenous information resources (databases). Disseminate S&T/R&D information through contemporary information services & tools. Strengthen National Science Reference Library through resource sharing & Inter-library collaborations (consortium) and empowerment of information professionals. Promotion of R&D based industrial development. Develop collaborations with national and international information networks. Facilitate printing of S&T/R&D Publications. Capacity/skill development of researchers & entrepreneurs. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Organizational Chart Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Patent Request Form Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Patent Request Form A patent is grant of exclusive rights for an invention to make, use and sell the invention for a limited period of 20 years. The patent grant excludes others from making, using, or selling the invention. Patent protection does not start until the actual grant of a patent. All fields are required. Name: Gender: Choose Male Female Status: Choose Student Faculty Staff Qualification: Choose BS MSC MS/Mphil Ph.D Post.doc Other If Student, Name of Supervisor: Institution/University: Department: Cell No: Email: Discipline: Choose Agricultural Sciences Animal Sciences Applied Sciences Biological Sciences Chemical siences Computer Siences Earth Sciences Economics Education Engineering sciences Environmental sciences Geographical sciences Geological sciences Humanities Industrial Technology Management sciences Mathematical Sciences Medical Sciences Physics Plant Sciences Psychological Sciences Social Sciences Space Sciences Statistical Sciences Other Title: Type of Request Abstract Full Text Human Check Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PJCIS | Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems - Research & Reviews Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES PJCIS (Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems (PJCIS) is a journal of research and reviews published by Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Centre (PASTIC). This is a peer reviewed journal of Computer Science and Engineering. It is an open access online journal published twice a year. The mission of the journal is to provide a forum for researchers to debate and discuss interdisciplinary issues in Computer Science, Computer System Engineering and Information Systems. It invites and welcomes contributions in all areas of Computer Science, Computer System Engineering and Information Systems. EISSN: 2519-5409 PISSN: 2519-5395 PJCIS, VOL-3, NO-2 PJCIS, VOL-3, NO-1 PJCIS, VOL-2, NO-2 PJCIS, VOL-2, NO-1 PJCIS, VOL-1, NO-2 PJCIS, VOL-1, NO-1 Call for Papers Author Guidelines Editorial Board Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | R&D Equipment Database - Research & Technology Resources Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES R&D equipment available under S&T/R&D Organizations, along with thier purpose/utilization. S&T/R&D Resource sharing Web Portal Provides data about Research and Development(R&D) equipment available under S&T/R&D Organizations. Data can be searched base on organization name, device name, specification, purpose and utilization. Contact detail against the each equipment is available for further clarification. Org Name ToE Device Name Lab Name PURPOSE STATUS SPECIFICATION UTILIZATION CLIENTS QTY CONTACT PERSON National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Wireless Communication Test Set Communication Lab Mobile phone calibration, GSM/GPRS/EGPRS, W-CDMA, CDMA2000 and TD-SCDMA software calibration Functional need Calibration Model-E660, 380MHz-2.7 GHz 2 POF Wah R&DDirectorate 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Radio Test Set Communication Lab Audio signal analysis, Transmitter Functional need Calibration Model-2965,100 KHz-1 GHz 5 PTCL NRTC Pak Army for ACS Project and exchanges. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Analog Signal Generator (Microwave Signal Generator) Communication Lab Signal Generation, AM, PM, FM modulation Functional need Calibration Model-N5183-520,100 KHz-20GHz 18 Pak Army for ACS Project Telec Electronics POF Wah R&D Dte. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Network Analyzer Communication Lab Testing of Antenna, RF Cable, Mixer, Amplifier, Resonators Functional need Calibration Model-RF E5071C 20 NUST University FAST University HiTEC University COMSATS University UET Taxila University BUTTEMS University Federal Urdu University PMO, NESCOM Pakistan Railway 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Spectrum Analyzer Communication Lab Wave Form Frequency Analysis Functional need Calibration 9KHz to 13.2 GHz 20 Telec Electronics PMO, NESCOM RTC, NESCOM Pakistan Railway 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Digital Storage Oscilloscope Communication Lab Digital Time Domain Wave Form Analysis / Storage Functional need Calibration 100 MHz 2 Channel 20 Heavy Electrical Complex Hattar POF Wah Noble Pakistan Steel Mill Telec Electronics POF Wah R&D Directorate NECOP PCRWR Pakistan Railways 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Network Analyzer Synthesized Function Generator Communication Lab Analog Function Generator Non-functional HP N/A Pak Army ACS Project Secure Communication Project. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Optical power Meter Communication Lab Measure the power of light in fiber cable Functional OWL 5 PTCL Academy ISB NECOP 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Inductance- Capacitance- Resistance (LCR) Meter Communication Lab Measure the capacitance, resistance, and inductance of circuits Functional need calibration HP, Model-4263B 22 Heavy Electrical Complex Hattar POF Wah Noble Pakistan Steel Mill Telec Electronics POF Wah R&D Directorate 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Microwave Frequency Counter Communication Lab Measure the frequency of unknown microwave signal Functional Model-5350B,20GHz 10 Secure Communication Project Telec Electronics POF Wah R&D Directorate NECOP PMO NESCOM RTC, NESCOM 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Handheld Frequency Counter / Detector Communication Lab Measure RF signal frequency/ Portable Functional CS-110-HBD, 30V@5A 5 Secure Communication Project POF Wah R&D Directorate 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Signal Strength Meter Communication Lab Detect and measure RF signals Functional Model-MIT-3201,2GHZ 6 Secure Communication Project POF Wah R&D Directorate 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Standing Wave Ratio (SWR)& Power Meter Communication Lab Measure RF power and SWR Functional Model-SP-220,1.8-200MHz 10 POF Wah R&D Directorate Telec Electronics PMO, NESCOM RTC, NESCOM Pakistan Steel Mill Pakistan Railway 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Fusion Splicer Machine, with accessories Communication Lab Use for joining single mode fiber cable Functional Model-FSM-60S,Single Mode 05 PTCL Academy NECOP 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Optical spectrum Analyzer Communication Lab Monitor power with respect to wavelength Functional need calibration Model-86140B, 700nm-1660nm 10 PTCL Academy NECOP 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Modular Network Tester Communication Lab Detect discontinuity in fiber cable Functional need calibration Model-OTDR 3910A, 1310-1550 5 PTCL Academy NECOP 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Torque Meter General Power Electronics Lab Torque /Speed measurement Functional TQ8800 Use as per R&D requirements Use within NIE 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) Spectrum Analyzer Power Electronics Lab FFT analyzer of signal Non-functional SRS SR 770 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Harmonic Tester Power Electronics Lab Harmonic analyses in signals Functional Duncan Instrument Star 3 Use as per R&D requirements Use within NIE 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Non Contract AC Voltage and Current Detector Power Electronics Lab Volt and current measurement Functional EXTECH DVA 30 Daily use Use within NIE 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Compact Appliance Tester / Power Analyzer Power Electronics Lab Analysis of volt, current, P.F & Frequency Functional EXTECH 380801 Daily use Use within NIE 01 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Battery Capacity Tester Power Electronics Lab Battery life measurement Functional EXTECH BT 100 Once in month Use within NIE 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Precision Inductance- Capacitance- Resistance (LCR) Meter Power Electronics Lab Measurement of Resistance, Inductance & Capacitance Non-functional Quad Tech 7000 Quad 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Electromagnetic Field (EMF) / Extremely Low Frequency(ELF) Meter Power Electronics Lab For measurement of EMF created by electric equipment Functional EXTECH 480823 Use as per R&D requirements Use within NIE 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Digital Soldering / De Soldering Station Power Electronics Lab For soldering and de soldering of components Functional XYTRONIX 988D Daily use Use within NIE 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE DC Milliohm Meter Power Electronics Lab Measurement of resisters Functional GOM-802 Use as per R&D requirements Use within NIE 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE DC Power supply Power Electronics Lab High volt power supply Functional G WINSTEK GPR-60H150 Daily use Use within NIE 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE DC power supply Power Electronics Lab Low volt power supply Functional G WINSTEK GPC-3030D Daily use Use in Lab 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE True RMS Power Analyzer Power Electronics Lab EXTECH 380801 0 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Digital Multi Meter Power Electronics Lab For volt, current and continuity Functional ISO-Tech-IDM-71 Daily use Use in Lab 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE True RMS Industrial Logging Digital Multimeter Power Electronics Lab For volt, current, continuity and resistance Functional Fluke- 289/FVF Daily use Use in Lab 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Thermal Imager Power Electronics Lab For thermal image Functional Fluke-Ti25 Use as per R&D requirements Use in Lab 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Power Logger Analyst Power Electronics Lab Power Logging Functional Fluke-1735 As per demand Use in Lab 3 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Airflow Meter Kit Power Electronics Lab Measurement of flow of air Functional Fluke-922 Use as per R&D requirements Use in Lab 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE IR Thermometer Power Electronics Lab Contact less Temperature Sensor Functional Fluke-561 Daily use Use in Lab 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE 1000A TRMS AC / DC Clamp Power Electronics Lab Current measurement Functional Fluke-376 Use as per R&D requirements Use in Lab 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Gas Leak Detector Power Electronics Lab Gas leakage detection Functional Fluke-GSD 600 Use as per R&D requirements Use in Lab 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Light Meter Auto Ranging Power Electronics Lab Lux measurement Functional Fluke LM-120 Use as per R&D requirements Use in Lab 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A GC-Mass Spectrometer Analytical Section, MBC For isolation, identification and quantification of organic compounds (volatile) Working but Temporarily out of order Shimadzu 25 8 to 10 clients including M.Phil/Ph.D. students of various universities sponsored by HEC. Oil and Ghee Industry, Pharmaceutical Industry 1 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Oil Bath Calibration / Temperature Lab. Calibration of Thermometers, RTD, T/C Working Julabo, Germany 10 1. M/s. Mohsin Match Factory (Pvt.) Ltd. 90-B, Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 2. M/s. Nisar Chishti M.R.(I.S.O) Associated Industries Ltd. Nowshera 3. M/s. Al- Badar MFG Gadoon Amazai 4. M/s. Injection (Pvt) Ltd. Plot No. 271 Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai KPK Pakistan. 5. M/s. Lasani Healthcare Gadoon Amazai Industrial Estate 29-A, R-1 Topi Swabi KPK. 6. M/s. Taj Syringes (Pvt) Ltd. Gadoon Swabi. 7. M/s. Royal Petrochemical Industries (Pvt) Ltd. 110 Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 8. M/s. LIBRA Pharmaceutical Pvt. Ltd. 77 Industrial Estate Hayatabad Peshawar. 9. M/s. Surgi Plast Plot No. 78, Road L-04, Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai. 10. M/s Bestway Cement Limited Plant Farooqia 12 km, Taxila-Haripur Road Farooqia Tehsil & District Haripur KPK Pakistan. 11. Bestway Cement Limited Hattar Suraj Gali Road, Village Shadi Hattar Distt Haripur, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 12. M/s Kohat Cement Company Limited 13. 37-P, Gulberg-II, Lahore 54660,Pakistan 14. M/s. Royal PVC Private Limited 113- Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 15. M/s. Philip Morris Pakistan Limited 22 KM, Swabi Road Mardan. Universal Scales Pvt. Ltd. 16. M/s. Philip Morris Pakistan Limited 22 KM-Mardan Swabi Road Mardan. On Behalf of Universal Scales Pvt. Ltd. 17. M/s. Bestway Cement Ltd.Chakwal Choa Saidan Shah Road Village Tatral Tehsil Choa Saidan Shah, District Chakwal Punjab Pakistan. 18. Shaheen Airport Services Bacha Khan International Airport Peshawar. 19. M/s. Alpha Pipe Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai Swabi. 20. M/s. UNISA Pvt. Ltd. Main G.T Road Adamzai, Akora Khattak District Nowshera. 21. M/s. Aries Pharmaceuticals (Pvt.) Ltd. 1-W, Hyatabad Industrial Estate Peshawar. 22. 21. M/s. Links 2000 Amman Plaza Flat# 4, 4th Floor Johar Town Lahore Pakistan. 1 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Fast Protein Liquid Chromatograph (FPLC) FBRC Protein Purification working BioRad, BioLogic LP 5 Used for research purposes 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A GC-Mass Spectrometer MBC For analysis of volatile organic samples Not Working Perkin Elmer NA NA 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A FTIR Spectrophotometer Phytochemical standardization Lab. (MBC For identification of compounds Working Shimadzu 25 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Pharma Industries 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A FTIR Spectrophotometer Phytochemical standardization Lab. (MBC For identification of compounds Working Shimadzu 25 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Pharma Industries 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Autoclave Botany section MBC For sterilization of media and apparatus Working Ogawa Seiti Co. Ltd. Tokyo Japan 02 10 to 12 clients including M.Phil/Ph.D. students of various universities sponsored by HEC. Oil and Ghee Industry, Pharmaceutical Industry 02 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Autoclave Microbiology Lab (FTC) For sterilization of media and apparatus Working ALP Japan 02 10 to 12 clients including M.Phil/Ph.D. students of various universities sponsored by HEC. Oil and Ghee Industry, Pharmaceutical Industry 02 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Cooled Incubator Botany section For incubation of plant culture and bacterial culture Working Gallen kamp Sanyo W. Germany 04 Peshawar, Agriculture and Kohat University 03 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Pulper Refiner Conventional Machine Shop For thick sheet cuttings Working Haco Belgium No production since last three years PASTC/ in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Cooled Incubator Microbiology Lab (FTC) For incubation of bacterial culture Working Memmert Germany 05 Peshawar, Agriculture and Kohat University 03 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A GSM Cutter ACRC/ Textile Lab Cutting of Textile fabric Working GMBH Germany 200 M/s. Pakistan Post Office M/s. Inspectorate of Pakistan 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Viscometer Phytochemical standardization Lab. (MBC) For the determination of viscosity of liquids and paste Working LVDV-11+P 02 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Pharma Industries 02 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Viscometer Materials Science Centre To determine the melting point of organic compounds Working HAAKE 6 R Plus, Thermo Code 9027-18091 Germany 01 NESPAK, Peshawar C&W Department Peshawar 02 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Digital melting Point Apparatus Phytochemical standardization Lab. (MBC To determine the melting point of organic compounds Working Gallen kamp 10 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Pharma Industries 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Automatic Dye Bath ACRC/ Textile Lab Dyeing of fabric Working Developed by PCSIR 200 M/s. Pakistan Post Office 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Material Science Centre For the determination of metals in ores, food products, pharmaceuticals and herbal products Working Z 8000, 190-8035, Hitachi, Japan 10 FATA Development Authority C&W Department Kauser Eng. Industrial Estate Peshawar Highway Authority, KP M/S UNISA (Pvt) Nowshera Garrison Eng. Army, Rawalpindi M/s Sonex Industry Pvt. Ltd. Gujranwala Miners 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Air Permeameter ACRC/ Textile Lab Test of air permeameter of textile fabric Working SDL Atlas 05 M/s. PCI group 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Microbial fermenter FBRC Producing Enzyme working BE, Marubishi, Japan 5-6 Used for research purposes 2 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Spectra flash Spectrophotometer Textile and Paper Lab./Material Science Centre For the opacity and brightness of paper and paper boards Working Model SF-650X S. No. 9059 Data color USA 45 Textbook Board Peshawar BISE Peshawar Technical Board Peshawar AIO University, Islamabad 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Automatic Washer ACRC/ Textile Lab Washing of textile fabric Working Haier 200 M/s. Pakistan Post Office 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A CHNS Elemental Analyzer Material Science Centre For the determination of Carbon, Hydrogen, Nitrogen and Sulfur in coal, food products, fertilizers and organometallics Working Elemental EL-III, Germany 05 M/s Water and Sanitation Company, Mingora, Saidu Sharif, Swat. Research Students of Universities 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Electronic Balance ACRC/ Textile Lab Weighing of fabric samples Working Ohaus USA 300 M/s. Pakistan Post Office 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Boiler FBRC Steam generation working BB7023, China 30 Nestle Pakistan Tetra pak, Pakistan Guranwala Foods Bunneys Michells Dawn bread Rafhan Foods Al Riaz, Rice Mills Basma Rice Mills Super Rice Mills Shakarganj Foods SGS, Pkistan CitroPak Shezan PFA WASA Qarshi Labs. PEL Acha Foods 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Spectro fluoro-meter Material Science Centre For determination of fluorescence properties of organic compounds, nanomaterials and also for water analysis Working Hitachi, Japan Used for Research & Development Work Used for Research & Development Work 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Electronic Press ACRC/ Textile Lab Drying of fabric samples Working SDL Atlas 300 M/s. Pakistan Post Office 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Tensile Strength Tester(fiber tester) ACRC/ Textile Lab To test the strength of yarn Working SDL Atlas 300 M/s. Pakistan Post Office M/s. Inspectorate of Pakistan 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Cloud & pour point apparatus Applied Chemistry/ Materials Science Centre For the determination of pour point of mineral oils Working Petrotest Model 16-2357 Germany 01 (ZTB) HYDRO POWER COMPLEX GADOON AMAZAI DIG Police, Inspection KPK Shaheen Airport Services Peshawar Sr. Supdt Police Peshawar SSP Coordination Peshawar Supdt. Customs Division Torkham 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A UV-Spectrophotometer ACRC/ Textile Lab Dye extortion of % fixation Working Thermo electron double beam 15 15 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Drying Oven FBRC For drying Food Products working Japan 30 Nestle Pakistan Tetra pak, Pakistan Guranwala Foods Bunneys Michells Dawn bread Rafhan Foods Al Riaz, Rice Mills Basma Rice Mills Super Rice Mills Shakarganj Foods SGS, Pkistan CitroPak Shezan PFA WASA Qarshi Labs. PEL Acha Foods 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Fractional Standard Weight Box ACRC/ Textile Lab For calibration Working China 300 M/s. Pakistan Post Office 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A High temp furnace Applied Chemistry/ Materials Science Centre For the determination of Loss on Ignition, organic matter and fusion of soil and ores Under repair ST-1600-101012, USA 20 Customs Station Torkham NESPAK Peshawar Miners M/s FWRDP Consultants Peshawar M/s MM Pakistan Ltd Peshawar North West Minerals Peshawar 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Colony counter FBRC Measure Microbial Count working Suntechs 30-100 Nestle Pakistan Tetra pak, Pakistan Guranwala Foods Bunneys Michells Dawn bread Rafhan Foods Al Riaz, Rice Mills Basma Rice Mills Super Rice Mills Shakarganj Foods SGS, Pkistan CitroPak Shezan PFA WASA Qarshi Labs. PEL Acha Foods OReal Foods Hamza Foods Six B Foods etc 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Microscope ACRC/ Textile Lab For fiber identification Working Mesdan Italy 20 M/s. Model custom collectorate. 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Flash point apparatus Applied Chemistry/ Materials Science Centre For the determination of flash point of mineral oils Under repair Petrotest Model-12-0775 Germany 01No (ZTB) HYDRO POWER COMPLEX GADOON AMAZAI DIG Police, Inspection KPK Shaheen Airport Services Peshawar Sr. Supdt. Police Peshawar Sr. SP Coordination Peshawar Supdt. Customs Division Torkham 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Standard Spray Tester ACRC/ Textile Lab Water repellency test Working Mesdan Italy 05 M/s. AATCC 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A pH Meter ACRC/ Textile Lab For pH of fabric Working MettlerTolledo Switzerland 200 M/s. Pakistan Post Office M/s. Ali sons M/s. PCSIR Lab 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Freeze Dryer FBRC Freeze Drying of samples working Eyela FD 550 5-6 Lab R& D and Research Students 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Flame photometer Environmental Section For the determination of sodium and potassium in ores, chemicals, water and food products Working Jenway, PFP 7 UK 25 PTC, UOP, UET, HEC, Shama Ghee, Allied industries, WAPDA, PDA, WSSP, Public health, KTH, North west hospital etc. 04 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Conductivity Meter ACRC/ Textile Lab For conductivity of water Working MettlerTolledo Switzerland 200 M/s. Pakistan Post Office M/s. Ali sons M/s. PCSIR Lab 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Buytro RefractoMeter (Analog) FBRC Fats quality working India 1 Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Jumbo Humidity/Temperature Meter Digital Hygrometer ACRC/ Textile Lab Humidity / temperature measurement Working SDL Atlas 200 M/s. Pakistan Post Office M/s. Ali sons M/s. PCSIR Lab 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Flame photometer Materials Science Centre For the determination of sodium and potassium in ores, chemicals, water and food products 02 WORKING JENWAY PFP 7, UK Corning M410, UK 08 Customs Station Torkham NESPAK Peshawar Miners M/s FWRDP Consultants Peshawar M/s MM Pakistan Ltd Peshawar North West Minerals Peshawar 00 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Flame Photometer FBRC For determination ofNa, K, Mg working Jenway/UK 7 A. H Foods ZahidaShakeel JDW Sugar Mills Ahmad Tripple EM lt. Nestle Pakistan 7 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Universal testing machine Building material section/Materials Science Centre For the determination of tensile, compression, bending and flexural strength of steel bars, plastic pipe, alloys, bricks and concrete blocks Working Shimadzu Japan 1000 KN 31 M/s NESPAK Pakistan M/s G3 Engineering Lahore M/s MOTT Macdonald Peshawar M/s Osmani & Co M/s SAK Consultants Peshawar 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Hot Plate FBRC Drying of samples working MSHP Use for 200-300 samples per month 200-300 clients per year 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Emission Spectrograph Materials Science Centre For the chemical composition of metals and alloys Working SpectroMax S. No. 120944/06 Germany 05 MMP Pvt. Ltd. House # 11, Chinar Road University Town Peshawar Executive Engineer Central Civil Division PAK PWD Bannu M/s National Engineering Services Pakistan (Pvt) Limited, NESPAK House No. 1-C, Block Model Town, Lahore Office of the Project Director (PRIP) Panjtar House, University Town Peshawar M/s Allied Engineering Consultant (Pvt) Ltd. Peshawar 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Grinding Mill FBRC Sample grinding working Romer-US Inc. Use for 200-300 samples per month --do-- 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Metallurgical Microscope Material Science Section For the metallurgical inspection of metals, alloys and ceramics Working Leica DM ILM HC 01 Used for Research and Development Work 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Muffle Furnace FBRC Ashing of sample working Sigma, England 5-10 Nestle, Gourmet Foods, Milllac Foods, Fauji Foods, Engro Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Balance Phytochemical standardization Lab. (MBC) For weighing Working Mettler 100 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Pharma Industries 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Gerber Centrifuge FBRC Fat determination working Eyela, Japan 5-10 Nestle, Gourmet Foods, Milllac Foods, Fauji Foods, Engro Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Refractometer FBRC Brix determination working 20 Shakarganj food products, F.R. Foods, Aqua classic Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Analytical Seive Shaker FBRC PSI Testing working Retsch Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Electric oven Pharmacology Section, MBC Used for high temperature Schutzart DIN 40050-IP20 Memmert Germany 04 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Internship, Companies like UNISA and Bricks 04 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Analytical Balance Weighing of samples working 25-50 R&D Samples and Nestle, Gourmet Foods, Milllac Foods, Fauji Foods, Engro Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Automatic Grinding, Polishing Machine PITMAEM For grinding & polishing of sample working (Struers, Denmark) 2 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Electric oven Food Nutrition and Bio-chemistry Section Working PCSIR Lahore 10 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Internship, Companies like UNISA and Bricks Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Electric Oven FBRC Sample Heating Working GLSC-S6-100-70 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Manual Grinding, Polishing Machine PITMAEM For grinding & polishing of sample working (Struers, Denmark) 03 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Electric oven Environmental Section Analysis of water and waste water Working UK 50 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Internship, Companies like UNISA and Bricks Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Electrolytic Etching Unit PITMAEM For etching of sample to reveal the microstructure of metals working (Struers, Denmark) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Image Analyzer PITMAEM For microscopic analysis working Leica UK 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Electric oven Food Nutrition and Bio-chemistry Section Used for pH determination Working HANNAH Sweden 05 R&D work, HEC Sponsored students, Internship, Companies like UNISA and Bricks Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Zoom Microscope PITMAEM For macrostructural analysis of metals working (Olympus, Japan) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Measuring Microscope PITMAEM For measuring of internal defects of metals in x-y-z directions working (Olympus, Japan) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Steam Generator Unit FBRC Steam Generator Unit Working GLSC-S6-100-70 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Shore Hardness Tester PITMAEM For hardness measurements of plastics, rubber and polymer samples working (Gibitre, Italy) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Micro Vicker Hardness Tester PITMAEM For hardness measurements of metallic samples working (Wilson, China) 1 Director General 042-99230697 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Photopolymer Dry Film Laminator Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 440/400 mm 60 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A pH meter Phytochemical standardization Lab. (MBC) For determination of pH Working HANNA instrument edge 04 HEC, WHO, SRSP,WAPDA, CDA, etc 02 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Ultrasonic Flaw Detector PITMAEM For non-destructive inspection of internal flaws/defects working Krautkramer, Germany) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Dye Penetrant PITMAEM For non-destructive inspection of surface & sub-surface flaws/defects working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Magnetic Detector PITMAEM For non-destructive inspection of surface flaws/defects working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A pH meter Food Processing and quality Control Section (FTC) Hannah Korea 05 M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Automatic Brinell Hardness Tester PITMAEM For hardness measurements of large metallic samples working (Indentec, UK) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Eddy Current Test Equipment PITMAEM For non-destructive inspection of tubular objects working (Eddy Current, USA) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Industrial X-Ray Equipment PITMAEM For scratch testing of metallic samples working (Balteographic, Belgium) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Fiber Tech Food Nutrition and Bio-chemistry Section (FTC) Determination of Crude Fiber in Foods Working FOSS Sweden 02 M/s Master food and beverages, Swat. M/s Prime Oil and Ghee Mills Gujgranwala M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. 02 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Optical Microscope FBRC For Microscopic analysis of metals Working NIKON 01 PITMAEM 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Micro Scratch Tester PITMAEM For scratch testing ofmetallic samples working (CSM, Switzerland Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A On Site Metallographic Kit PITMAEM For on-site microstructural analysis Working (struers, Denmark) 01 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Lovibond Tintometer Oils & Fats/ ACRC Determination of Color of Oil/ Analysis Working PFX-995 01-02 Dalda Pvt. Ltd., Paracha Textile mill, Custom House, Fazhab Pvt. Ltd. and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Tribo Tester PITMAEM For tear testing of bulk and Nano-composite coatings Working (teer Coating) 01 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Rotational Viscometer Oils & Fats/ ACRC Analysis of oil viscosity Working HAAKE Viscotester 387-0100 Rare Dalda Pvt. Ltd., Paracha Textile mill, Custom House, Fazhab Pvt. Ltd. and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Refractro-meter Oils & Fats/ ACRC Refractive index of oil Working Rechert 01 Dalda Pvt. Ltd., Paracha Textile mill, Custom House, Fazhab Pvt. Ltd. and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A GAS Chromatograph Oils & Fats/ ACRC Fatty acid profile, Trans fats in oil & fats and food commodities/ Analysis Working Perkin Elmer Clarus 500 01-02 Dalda Pvt. Ltd., Paracha Textile mill, Custom House, Fazhab Pvt. Ltd. and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Universal Testing Machine (UTM) 5kN, 50kN and 1000kN Plastic & Polymer/ACRC Tensile strength, Elongation, Tear strength, Compressive strength of Polymeric material, mild steel and construction material (stone) Working 1.Instron (4301) 2.Tinius Olsen (H50KT) 3.Tinius Olsen (Type-C000) 07-10 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A De-MattiaFlexon Check Plastic & Polymer/ACRC Performance evaluation of elastomers/synthetic leather Working Gibitre S. No. FLE 2002012 None None 1 Director General 021-99261922 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE PCB Flying Probe Tester Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional STEVE PCB 3000 60 AWC, ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 60 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Double side Through Hole Plating Line tank Printed Circuit Board Lab Compact a L 40 ABC 2Cu PTH Process System with 2 Copper Plating tanks17 x 19. Functional PROTEC 3040COMPECTA L 40ABC 2 CU 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX ,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Double side Through Hole Plating Line tank Double Side UV Exposure Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional E XP 8000/ 12000 Exposure units 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX ,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Conveyrize Spray Processing Machine for Develop Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Hot Air Dryer Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional AIR 2000 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Hot Air Stove Oven Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX ,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Low Temperature Brittleness Polymer/ACRC Material CEAST S. No. 17079 Type 5665 Pakistan Navy, NHA and etc Director General 021-99261922 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Surface Protection Gold/Silver Immersion Tin System using Omnicrom Chemicals Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Pneumatic Screen Stretcher Printed Circuit Board Lab Pneumatic screen stretching system with clamps Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE UV Curing Machine Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional RBM 3008000/12000 Exposure Units 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX , NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Screen Mash Tension Meter Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional STM - 50 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Rotary Brush Cleaning Machine Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Photo plotter Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional size 450 x 400 mmSN618 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE 510mm wide double sided Conveyor zed Dry Film Stripping Processor Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional AIR 2000 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX ,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Deionizer with filter candle Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional lonex KB 60 AWC, ELECTROFLUX ,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR, PMO, CARE (PVT), TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE CNC Drilling Routing Machine Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional BUNGARD 9611992CCD 60 AWC ELECTROFLUX NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR, PMO, CARE (PVT), TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Vacuum Multilayer Press Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional RMP210 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Pin Extracting Machine Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX , NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Semi Auto Pinning Machine Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX ,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Diazo film processor Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Target Punching Machine Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Target Drilling Machine Printed Circuit Board Lab Functional 60 AWC,ELECTROFLUX,NUST, MTC, DESTO, AH AUTO, RWR,PMO, CARE (PVT),TESL IND, CUST, COMSATS, IST, CASE UNI, UET, AIR UNI, NDC, ICCC, STEM PAK, LUMP, SKY ELECTRIC, METCORD, ALLIED ENGG, NEXTEL, FAST TECHZYN 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Hi-Potential Tester (Dielectric Withstand) CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional AR USA Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Refractometer Food Processing and Quality Control Section For the determination of total soluble solid (TSS) Working RX-1000 Japan 05 M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal. M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat 02 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Muffle Furnace Food Processing and Quality Control Section For the determination of Loss on Ignition, organic matter and fusion of soil and ores Working Me-1702, PCSIR 03 M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A UV Spectrophotometer Environmental Section To check the absorbance of organic compounds Working Hitachi Japan 10 PTC, UOP, UET, HEC, Shama Ghee, Allied industries, WAPDA, PDA, WSSP, Public health, KTH, North west hospital etc. M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat 03 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A UV Spectrophotometer Food Nutrition and Bio-chemistry Section Used for measuring absorbance Working Schimaduzu Japan 05 PTC, UOP, UET, HEC, Shama Ghee, Allied industries, WAPDA, PDA, WSSP, Public health, KTH, North west hospital etc. M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A UV Spectrophotometer Food Processing and Quality Control Section To check the absorbance of organic compounds Working UV-1700 Japan 02 PTC, UOP, UET, HEC, Shama Ghee, Allied industries, WAPDA, PDA, WSSP, Public health, KTH, North west hospital etc. M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Moisture Analyzer Food Nutrition Bio-chemistry Section For the determination of moisture in coal, chemicals and food products Working Sartorius Germany 05 M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat 02 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Insulation Resistance Tester (Megger Test) CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional AR USA Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Ground Bond / Continuity Tester CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional AR USA Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A DSH-50-1 Japan Food Processing and Quality Control Section Used for moisture determination Working Food Processing and Quality Control Section 05 M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat 02 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Line Leakage Tester (Touch Current Test) CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional AR USA Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATS University NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Refractometer Food Nutrition and Bio-chemistry Section For the determination of total soluble solid (TSS) Working ATAGO Japan 10 M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal. M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat 02 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Omnia Compliance Analyzer (6 in 1) CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional AR USA Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Temperature and Humidity Chamber CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional GIANT FORCETAIWAN Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Electrostatic Discharge Gun CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional TESEQNSG 435 Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Electric Autoclave Botany section (MBC) Microbilogy Lab (FTC) For Sterilization of glass apparatus Working PCSIR (0-3000C) Robus Tech UK 01 30 University of Peshawar, Agriculture University, Pharmaceutical industries etc. 02 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE COMBI (3 in 1) Surge, Burst & Power Fail Tester CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional TESEQNSG 3040 Use as per R&D requirements Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Damp Oscillatory Wave Tester CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional EM Test Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Integrating Sphere CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional LISUN Group Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Grain Analyzer Material Science Section Chemical analysis of grain Working Brook Heaven, USA 01 Mr. Hazrat Bilal, MS Scholar, Civil Engineering, UET Taxila Engr. Muhammad Adeel Khan, Ph.D Scholar (Civil Engg.) CECOS University Peshawar 01 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE AC Power Source CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional LISUN Group Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Power Meter CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional LISUN Group Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Photometer CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional LISUN Group Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Rotary Vacuum Evaporator Phytochemical standardization Lab. (MBC To evaporate/ concentrate samples at reduced pressure. For removal of solvent and water content from extracts (concentration) Not Working EYELA 05 R&D Work, HEC Sponsored students, Pharma Industries 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Environmental Section Minerals Analysis in Water, Waste water and Food items Working Hitachi Z-2000 04 PTC, UOP, UET, HEC, Shama Ghee, Allied industries, WAPDA, PDA, WSSP, Public health, KTH, North west hospital etc 01 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Lux Meter CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional RS Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Temperature & Humidity Meter CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional RS Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATS University NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Multimeter CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional Agilent Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Clamp Meter CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional KWtech Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Haz Dust Analyzer Particulate Matta Environmental Section Particulate matter in air Working USA 01 Cherate, Shama Ghee, Allied Industries, Lalazar Consultant, PID, Dynea, Locomotive factory, Qartas paper mills, Frontier wood, AGE cabbles,The solututioners etc 01 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Infrared Thermometer CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration Functional RS Use as per R&D requirements PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE EMF Meter CENTRE FOR QUALITY TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS (CQTC-EP) LAB Testing & Calibration RS PCTCL Shifa International Hospital NIE labs. COMSATSUniversity NUST MES Jehlum Misc others. 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Spectrum Analyzer GENERAL PURPOSE LAb The high-performance signal and spectrum analyzer helps engineers and designers accomplish the most demanding tasks like, RF Power analysis, Amplitude analysis upto 50GHz frequency. Its wide internal analysis bandwidth allows the characterization of wideband components and communications systems. Functional/ Calibrated Rohde & Schwarz Frequency range from 2 Hz to 50 GHz Low phase noise of 137 dBc (1 Hz) at 10 kHz offset (1 GHz carrier) 88 dBc dynamic range (with noise cancellation) for WCDMA ACLR measurements Up to 2 GHz analysis bandwidth < 0.4 dB total measurement uncertainty up to 8 GHz Real-time analysis up to 160 MHz bandwidth. High-resolution 12.1" (31 cm) touch screen for convenient operation. Multiple measurement applications can be run and displayed in parallel Use as per R&D requirements 1. NIE Projects a. PARCO Project RF Modem Testing Testing of VCO Microwave Link Testing Up/Down Converter b. Pakistan Railways Antenna Gain Testing c. Communication Lab Wireless High Precision Electronic Detonation System 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Signal Analyzer GENERAL PURPOSE LAB It measures the magnitude and phase of the input signal at a single frequency within the IF bandwidth of the instrument. It employs digital techniques to extract useful information that is carried by an electrical signal.Agilent N9000A CXA signal analyzer can be viewed as a measurement platform, with operations such as spectrum analysis (including phase noise, power, and distortion) ranging from 9KHz to 13.6GHz. Functional/ Calibrated Agilent N9000A CXA Frequency options from 9 kHz to 13.6 GHz Optional baseband generator with realtime coder and arbitrary waveform generator for maximum flexibility Optional ARB-only baseband generators as cost-saving alternatives Support of 3GPP LTE FDD and TDD, 3GPP FDD/HSPA/HSPA+, GSM/EDGE/EDGE Evolution, TD-SCDMA, WLAN, WiMAX and all other important digital standards Fully fledged GNSS simulator with GPS, Glonass, Galileo, BeiDou and QZSS RF bandwidth of up to 160 MHz with internal baseband generator I/Q modulator with 528 MHz RF bandwidth Optimized for high production throughput Prepared for aerospace and defense applications Use as per R&D requirements 1. NIE a. Pakistan Railways Project Antenna Testing 433.92MHz Tx & Rx Testing Level crossing system b. PARCO Project Up/Down converter Testing of VCO Microwave Link test Up-Converter L-band c. Communication Lab Wireless High Precision Electronic Detonation System Signal Generator & Spectrum Analyzer Calibration RF Power Amplifier testing Mixer & Amp testing LNA Testing d. CQTC Lab COMSATS Function Generator Calibration 2. Academia a. King Saud University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Wide Band Amplifier b. NUST 2.4G Transmitter - FYP c. Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering, and Management Sciences, Quetta Low Noise Amp testing 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Logic Analyzer GENERAL PURPOSE LAB A logic analyzer captures and displays multiple signals from a digital system or digital circuit. A logic analyzer may convert the captured data into timing diagrams, protocol decodes, state machine traces, assembly language, or may correlate assembly with source-level software. Logic analyzers have advanced triggering capabilities, and are useful when a user needs to see the timing relationships upto 204 signals in a digital system. Functional/ Calibrated Agilent (N116806A) 204-channel portable logic analyzer with up to 32 M acquisition memory depth. 15-inch (38.1 cm) color display with touch screen. Comprehensive single-ended signal support, threshold is adjustable in -5 V to 5 V (10 mV increments). 4 GHz (250 ps) timing zoom with 64 K memory. 1.0 GHz / 500 MHz (half / full-channel) conventional timing with deep memory. 500 MHz transitional timing. State clock rates up to 450 MHz. Data rates: up to 500 Mb/s. Automated threshold/sample position setup for accurate measurements on high speed buses. Simultaneous eye diagrams on all channels identify problem signals quickly. Selectable memory depths: 1 M, 4 M, 16 M, 32 M. Compatible with 40-pin logic analyzer probes. Use as per R&D requirements 1. NIE Projects a. PARCO Project Thyristor TriggerCircuit b. Power Line Conditioner MOSFET switching analysis 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Oscilloscope GENERAL PURPOSE LAB An oscilloscope commonly used to display and analyze the waveform of electronic signals. In effect, the device draws a graph of the instantaneous signal voltage as a function of time. It ranges upto 1 GHz, with 5 GSa/s and 16 digital channels. Functional/ Calibrated 1 GHz, 4 Analog Plus 16 Digital Channels Screen: 8.5-inch WVGA display Fastest update rate of 1,000,000 waveforms per second Memory: 4 Mpts (Optional, 2Mpts interleaved standard) Integrated logic timing analyzer (MSO models, or upgrade with DSOX3MSO) Built-in 20-MHz function/arbitrary waveform generator option Hardware-based serial-bus protocol analyzer options Digital voltmeter (DVM) option with 3-digit voltage and 5-digit frequency counter measurements Use as per R&D requirements 1. NIE a. CQTC Lab COMSATS Function Generator Calibration b. Pakistan Railways Project 433.92 MHz Tx & Rx Level crossing system c. PARCO Project Up / Down link converter d. Power Line Conditioner Switching PWM analysis In circuit noisefiltering Output Sine wave analysis 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE UPV Audio Analyzer GENERAL PURPOSE LAB UPV audio analyzer handle both analog and digital audio measurements. Analog generator, generates standard audio signal in different wave shapes. Functional/ Calibrated Rohde & Schwarz (UPV Audio Analyzer) DC to 250KHz Suitable for all interfaces (analog, digital and combined) Simultaneous display of multiple measurement functions Sampling rate up to 400 kHz Compact instrument with integrated PCS lots for future options Use as per R&D requirements 1. NIE Testing of Audio encoder and decoders IC 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Solder Paste Printer Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Printing the SMT PCBs Functional Essemtec/Tucano Fully automatic 21-25 days 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Solder Paste Printer (Tucano Plus Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Printing the SMT PCBs Non-functional calibration needed Essemtec/Tucano-Plus Fully automatic As per need Micropak Pvt. Ltd. NECOP (NESCOM) HQ Electronics Berjaya Electronics 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Pick and place machine (Cobra Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Component placement on the PCBs (20000 components / hour) Functional Essemtec/Cobra 20000 CPH 21-25 days Micropak Pvt. Ltd. NECOP (NESCOM) HQ Electronics Berjaya Electronics 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Pick and place machine (Paraquda) Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Component placement on the PCBs (9000 components/hour) Functional Essemtec/Paraquda 10000 CPH 21-25 days Micropak Pvt. Ltd. NECOP (NESCOM) HQ Electronics Berjaya Electronics 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Reflow Oven Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Bakes the PCBs through reflow controlled heat to cure the PCB at final stage of assembly Functional Essemtec/RO-400FC Four Stage 21-25 days Micropak Pvt. Ltd. NECOP (NESCOM) HQ Electronics Berjaya Electronics 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Reflow Oven Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Bakes the PCBs through reflow controlled heat to cure the PCB at final stage of assembly Non-functional Essemtec/RO-300FC Three Stage 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Conducto-meter Environmental Section Analysis in water Working TDScan Taiwan 25 PTC, UOP, UET, HEC, Shama Ghee, Allied industries, WAPDA, PDA, WSSP, Public health, KTH, North west hospital etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Automated Optical Inspection Machine Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Inspects the assembled PCBs for any fault/shortcomings Functional MIRTEC/MV3 Five camera inspection, fully automatic 15 days Micropak Pvt. Ltd. NECOP (NESCOM) HQ Electronics Berjaya Electronics 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Land Flue Gas Analyzer Environmental Section Stack emission gas analysis Working UK 01 Cherta, Shama Ghee, Qartas Paper mills, etc 01 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Hybrid Rework Station Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Performs SMT re-wrok on efected/deficient PCBs Functional ERSA/HR550 Semi automatic hybrid BGA re-Work station 15 days Micropak Pvt. Ltd. NECOP (NESCOM) HQ Electronics Berjaya Electronics 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A HPLC Mycotoxin Lab Mycotoxin Analysis in Food and Feed Working Hitachi Japan Peshawar University, Agriculture University, Pharmaceutical Industries 01 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Conformal dispenser (Scorpion) Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Performs Coating and encapsulation of PCBs so that end product may qualify IP 65, 66 and 67 standards. Also used in double sided assembly as glue dispensing machine. Non-functional Essemtec/Scorpion 80,000 DPH 10 days Micropak Pvt. Ltd. NECOP (NESCOM) HQ Electronics Berjaya Electronics 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Manufacturing Defects Analyzer Advanced SMT Pilot Production Line (BMR Project) Checks PCBs for any manufacturing defects or it is called electrical testing. Functional TRI/TR518 FII Electrical verification and testing of Assembled PCBs Just installed 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Auto kjhedhal Food Nutrition and Bio-chemistry Section Determination of Nitrogen Content / Protein Content Working VELP Scientifica Italy 05 M/s Hafeez Iqbal Oil and Ghee Inds. (Pvt.) Ltd. Haripur. M/s. Prime Oil and Ghee Mills, 12-km, Lahore Side, GT Road Gujranwal. M/s. Master Food and Beverages, G.T. Road Qamber Mingora Swat 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Rotary Evaporator 200(Small) Process Development Lab. (MBC) For concentration of extract/ distillation of solvent Working Buchi R- 200 Switzerland Buchi RE Germany 60 Brick Laboratories Lahore/ HEC sponsored students/R & D activities 02 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Digital Oscilloscope Automation &Control Engineering Lab Advanced industrial training on PLC, HMI, SCADA. Human Machine Interface (Delta). SCADA (Trace mode). Ladder Logic Programming (CX- Programmer Omron, Step 7 Basic Siemens, Step 7- Micro Siemens) Functional Regol Use as per R&D requirements Advance Industrial Training to Engineer/Diploma Engineers 4 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Frequency Counter Automation &Control Engineering Lab Advanced industrial training on PLC, HMI, SCADA. Human Machine Interface (Delta). SCADA (Trace mode). Ladder Logic Programming (CX- Programmer Omron, Step 7 Basic Siemens, Step 7- Micro Siemens) Functional Use as per R&D requirements Advance Industrial Training to Engineer/Diploma Engineers Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Function Generators Automation &Control Engineering Lab Advanced industrial training on PLC, HMI, SCADA. Human Machine Interface (Delta). SCADA (Trace mode). Ladder Logic Programming (CX- Programmer Omron, Step 7 Basic Siemens, Step 7- Micro Siemens) Functional Fluke Use as per R&D requirements Advance Industrial Training to Engineer/Diploma Engineers 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Crushing Mill Mycotoxin Lab For crushing solid materials Working RAS Mill USA 05 Brick Laboratories Lahore/ HEC sponsored students/R & D activities 01 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Digital Clamp Meters Automation &Control Engineering Lab Advanced industrial training on PLC, HMI, SCADA. Human Machine Interface (Delta). SCADA (Trace mode).Ladder Logic Programming (CX- Programmer Omron, Step 7 Basic Siemens, Step 7- Micro Siemens) Functional Fluke Use as per R&D requirements Advance Industrial Training to Engineer/Diploma Engineers 1 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Digital Scope Multimeter Automation &Control Engineering Lab Advanced industrial training on PLC, HMI, SCADA. Human Machine Interface (Delta). SCADA (Trace mode). Ladder Logic Programming (CX- Programmer Omron, Step 7 Basic Siemens, Step 7- Micro Siemens) Functional Fluke Use as per R&D requirements Advance Industrial Training to Engineer/Diploma Engineers 5 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Power Supply Automation &Control Engineering Lab Advanced industrial training on PLC, HMI, SCADA. Human Machine Interface (Delta). SCADA (Trace mode). Ladder Logic Programming (CX- Programmer Omron, Step 7 Basic Siemens, Step 7- Micro Siemens) Functional GUNSTEK Use as per R&D requirements Advance Industrial Training to Engineer/Diploma Engineers 5 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE IC Tester Automation &Control Engineering Lab Automation &Control Engineering Lab Advanced industrial training on PLC, HMI, SCADA. Human Machine Interface (Delta). SCADA (Trace mode). Ladder Logic Programming (CX- Programmer Omron, Step 7 Basic Siemens, Step 7- Micro Siemens) Functional BK Use as per R&D requirements Advance Industrial Training to Engineer/Diploma Engineers 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Universal Programmer Automation &Control Engineering Lab Advanced industrial training on PLC, HMI, SCADA. Human Machine Interface (Delta). SCADA (Trace mode). Ladder Logic Programming (CX- Programmer Omron, Step 7 Basic Siemens, Step 7- Micro Siemens) Functional Xeltek Use as per R&D requirements Advance Industrial Training to Engineer/Diploma Engineers 2 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE ModelSim INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB Logic and Functional design of an IC in a hardware description language (HDL) as well as its simulation with a test bench. Functional SE6.3d Use as per R&D requirements Facilities mainly used for training purposes of engineers and students. No. of internships and training provided in 2017-18 = 20 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Leonardo Spectrum INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB Synthesis of the high level HDL code to gate-level netlists, using Available design kits. Functional 20146.4 Use as per R&D requirements Facilities mainly used for training purposes of engineers and students. No. of internships and training provided in 2017 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Pyxis Schematic INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB Design capture of circuit schematics and a variety of detailed simulations. Functional 19.1-0.0 Use as per R&D requirements Facilities mainly used for training purposes of engineers and students. No. of internships and training provided in 2017 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Pyxis Layout INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB Physical layout design from the geometric level all the way to cell based design, floor planning, placement, routing etc. Functional 19.1-0.0 Use as per R&D requirements Facilities mainly used for training purposes of engineers and students. No. of internships and training provided in 2017 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Analog and Mixed Signal (AMS) Simulation INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB Integrates with Pyxis for simulations Functional 13.1b5 Use as per R&D requirements Facilities mainly used for training purposes of engineers and students. No. of internships and training provided in 2017 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE ELDO INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB A circuit simulator based on SPICE models. Functional (part of AMS) Use as per R&D requirements Facilities mainly used for training purposes of engineers and students. No. of internships and training provided in 2017 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE EZWAVE INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB The graphing tool for visualizing the results of the simulations Functional (part of AMS) Use as per R&D requirements Facilities mainly used for training purposes of engineers and students. No. of internships and training provided in 2017 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE CALIBRE INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB Integrates with Pyxis Layout for design verification processes, like Design Rule Check (DRC), Layout versus Schematic (LVS) and parasitic extraction. Functional 2012.2-17.11 Use as per R&D requirements Integrates with Pyxis Layout for design verification processes, like Design Rule Check (DRC), Layout versus Schematic (LVS) and parasitic extraction. 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE Design Kits (GDK and ADK, with 0.18um and 0.35um TSMC processes) INTEGRATED CIRCUIT DESIGN CENTRE LAB Design kits that have important information about the process, necessary for the other software tools performing different tasks in the overall design flow. Functional Use as per R&D requirements Facilities mainly used for training purposes of engineers and students. No. of internships and training provided in 2017-18 = 20 6 installed Chinese available upto 20 Dr. Kamran Lateef DTS&C 051-9265026 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Binoculars ZSD LAB Used to see distant animals especially Ungulates and Carnivores during fieldwork Bushnell (22x50 Expsl) Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Binoculars ZSD LAB Used to see distant animals especially Ungulates and Carnivores during fieldwork Olympus(12x50 ExpsI) Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Camera ZSD LAB Used to prepare digital images during indoor and outdoor research work (Olympus)E300 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Orbital Shaker Phytochemical standardization Lab. (MBC) For shaking of samples Working KJAKE & KUNKEL 1. M/s. Mohsin Match Factory (Pvt.) Ltd. 90-B, Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 2. M/s. Nisar Chishti M.R.(I.S.O) Associated Industries Ltd. Nowshera 3. M/s. Al- Badar MFG Gadoon Amazai 4. M/s. Injection (Pvt) Ltd. Plot No. 271 Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai KPK Pakistan. 5. M/s. Lasani Healthcare Gadoon Amazai Industrial Estate 29-A, R-1 Topi Swabi KPK. 6. M/s. Taj Syringes (Pvt) Ltd. Gadoon Swabi. 7. M/s. Royal Petrochemical Industries (Pvt) Ltd. 110 Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 03 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Ectrophoresis Equipment with Power Supply ZSD LAB Used in molecular work for the separation of protein / DNA/molecules Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Orbital Shaker Mycotoxin Lab For shaking of samples Working Heidolph Germany 10 1. M/s. Mohsin Match Factory (Pvt.) Ltd. 90-B, Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 2. M/s. Nisar Chishti M.R.(I.S.O) Associated Industries Ltd. Nowshera 3. M/s. Al- Badar MFG Gadoon Amazai 4. M/s. Injection (Pvt) Ltd. Plot No. 271 Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai KPK Pakistan. 5. M/s. Lasani Healthcare Gadoon Amazai Industrial Estate 29-A, R-1 Topi Swabi KPK. 6. M/s. Taj Syringes (Pvt) Ltd. Gadoon Swabi. 7. M/s. Royal Petrochemical Industries (Pvt) Ltd. 110 Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 03 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Orbital Shaker Food Nutrition and Bio-chemistry Section Used for mixing / solubilization of solutions Working PCSIR Lahore 05 1. M/s. Mohsin Match Factory (Pvt.) Ltd. 90-B, Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 2. M/s. Nisar Chishti M.R.(I.S.O) Associated Industries Ltd. Nowshera 3. M/s. Al- Badar MFG Gadoon Amazai 4. M/s. Injection (Pvt) Ltd. Plot No. 271 Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai KPK Pakistan. 5. M/s. Lasani Healthcare Gadoon Amazai Industrial Estate 29-A, R-1 Topi Swabi KPK. 6. M/s. Taj Syringes (Pvt) Ltd. Gadoon Swabi. 7. M/s. Royal Petrochemical Industries (Pvt) Ltd. 110 Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 03 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Kinematic Viscosity bath FTC Viscosity of liquids Not Working Koehler USA NA NA 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Polari meter FTC To check the polarity of the compounds and for sugar purity Working Atago Japan 01 M/s Master food and beverage, Swat 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Calibrator Calibration / Electronics Lab. Calibration of Multimeters Working Inmel 7000, Poland 04 1. M/s. Transformer Technologies (Pvt.) Ltd. GT Road Taru Jabba Near Tarnab Farm Peshawar. 2. M/s Crescent Electronics Traders, Lahore on Behalf of M/s. Links 2000, 6-Civic centre Moon Market Faisal Town Lahore. 3. M/s. Associate & Development Mascot Consultant (JV) House # 602 Street # 36 Sector E-11 / 3 Islamabad. 4. M/s. Philip Morris22nd KM Mardan Swabi Road Mardan. 5. M/s. Hitech Network (Pvt) Ltd. 163-P Gulberg III Lahore Pakistan. 6. M/s.Pir Muhammad& Co. Govt Contractor & General Order Suppliers 1st Floor Zaib Plaza Tehkal Payan University Road Peshawar 7. M/s. Imtiaz Wires & Cables Works Industry Near Habib Musjid Back Side PSO Petrol Pump G.T Road Amangarh Nowshera. 8. M/s. MAKKAYS Kulsum Plaza, 42 Jinnah Avenue, Islamabad. 9. M/s. Links 2000 Amman Plaza Flat# 4, 10. 4th Floor Johar Town Lahore Pakistan. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Digital Single-Lens Reflex (DSLR) Camera ZSD LAB Used for preparation of high definition digital images of zoological specimens during laboratory and fieldwork Canon EOS 6D with 24-105mm Lens with Bag Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Telephoto Zoom Lens Camera ZSD LAB Used to prepare digital images of distant flying birds and mammals during fieldwork Canon EF 100-400mm with Bag (Camera & lens), 32GB SD Card Class 10 extreme Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A GPS ZSD LAB Used for navigation and positioning data during field studies. Garmin model MBP78 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A GPS ZSD LAB Used for navigation and positioning data during field studies. MAP 276cX (Germins) Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Laser Range Finder ZSD LAB Used to calculate Ariel distance (stream widths, cliff to cliff distance etc.) during fieldwork (Nikon) Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Microscope ZSD LAB Advanced research stereozoom microscope used for studying very minute morphological characteristics of insects and invertebrates. It is also quipped withdigital still camera Olympus ZSx 16 with computer Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Microscope ZSD LAB Simple stereozoom microscope used for studying morphological Characteristics of insects and Invertebrates. It is also equipped with digital still camera Olympus ZSx7 with computer Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Microscope ZSD LAB Simple stereozoom microscope used for studying morphological Characteristics of insects and invertebrates. (wild heerbrugg) 228513 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Reconyx Ultra fire WR 6 Digital camera traps ZSD LAB Used for monitoring the presence of mammals/reptiles during field studies Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Spotting Scope kit ZSD LAB Used to monitor and see birds and mammals from distant pickets during fieldwork 20-60 X 80 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Weather Tracker ZSD LAB Used to monitor weather profile during ecological and tel11atic~ fieldwork 4500NV Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Laminar flow Chamber BSD LAB For inoculation and removal of microorganisms Working 1 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Incubator BSD LAB For preservation of samples Working 3 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Weighing balance BSD LAB For measuring / balancing of different chemicals / liquids Working 2 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Autoclave BSD LAB For sterilization of media and glasswares Working 2 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Hot air drying chamber BSD LAB For removal of moisture from samples Working 1 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Humidifier (small) BSD LAB For increasing humidity in room Working 1 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Plant growth Chamber BSD LAB For growing plants in control conditions Working 1 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Muffle furnace BSD LAB Isolation of subject material from fuel Out of order 1 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Microscope For observing samples / microorganisms Out of order 11 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A PMGI (Algae) BSD LAB For use in processing of algal samples Working 1 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A GPS (E- Trex) BSD LAB For field visit use, calculates geographical location by receiving information from GPS satellites. Helpful in field data collection. Working 1 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Analog Single-Lens Reflex (ASLR)Camera BSD LAB Use for photography of samples during field visit Out of order Sony Cyber shot(5MP) 1 Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Polarizing Microscope Earth Science Division Polarizing microscope isessentially required for thinsection Preparation to observethe fineness and perfection orthe thin sections during theirpreparation. It is also used forpetrographyof rocks/ mineralsand fossils. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Electric oven Earth Science Division Electric oven is used to remove moisture from the rock samples. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Muffle furnace Earth Science Division A muffle is used when the subject material is isolated from the fuel and all of the products of combustion, including gases and flying ash. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Centrifuge It is used for separation of fluids, gas or liquid, based on density. Separation is achieved by spinning a vessel containing material at high speed. The Centrifugal force pushes heavier materials to the outside of the vessel. One is working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Ultra-sonic Cleaner For shaking of rock samples. An ultra-sonic cleaner is used for cleaning delicate metals. The ultra-sonic waves emitted by the machine create vibrations in a cleaning solution. Tiny bubbles, which result from these vibrations, make their way into all the cracks and crevices of the items being cleaned. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Fuming Hood A fume hood is a type of local ventilation device that is designed to limit exposure to hazardous or toxic fumes, vapors or dust. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Jaw Crusher The jaw crusher is used to reduce the size of large rocks into smaller size like gravels. It is not only for that, but It is also used for recycling of waste materials. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Vibrating Cup Mill In the Vibrating Cup Mill,the grinding is performed by horizontal circular oscillations of the grinding set on a Vibrating Plate. The grinding set consisting of ring and puck comminute the grinding sample with extremely high pressure,Impact forces and friction. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Hot pate A hot plate is used as a stand- alone appliance, but is often used as a substitute for one of the burners from an oven range or a Kitchen stove. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Rock /Tile Cutter It is used for the cutting of rocks and minerals. Large samples of rocks and minerals are cut into smaller size for study. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Thin Section Equipment i. Cutting & grinding unit ii. Lapping & polishing unit iii. Bonding unit & hotplate Cutting and grinding unit for cutting and grinding of rocks and minerals up to the desired size. Lapping & polishing unit used for lapping and polishing of thin section of rocks and mineral samples for the Study in mineralogy, petrography, Sedimentology and palaeontology Bonding unit and hotplate is used for mounting of rocks and mineral samples. Working Dr. Muhammad Rafique Director General 0345-5462287 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A "Automatic Laminator (with 2200 mm x 36D0Tnm" "Lamination Lab" Used for Laminating Solar Panel Assemblies Functional "(Wuhan Technology, China) Capacity:4x300 W" As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A "Solder Strip Cutting Machine" "Lamination Lab" "Used to cut the PV ribbon for soldering purposes" 1 "(Wuhan Technology, China)Capacity:4x300 W" As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Panel Assembly Position Tester Lamination Lab It provides Voc before lamination Functional ( Wuhan Technology , China ) Capacity : 300 W As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A "Automatic Framing Machine" "Lamination Lab" "Used for framing the laminated solar panels for transportation and protection" Functional "(Wuhan Technology, China) Capacity:4x300 W" As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A "Solar Module Repairing Table (De-Lamination Machine) " "Lamination Lab" Used to delaminate the laminated panels. Functional "(Wuhan Technology, China) Capacity:4x300 W" As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A "Solar Cell Scriber / Cutting Machine" "Lamination Lab" "Used for cuttingSolar Cells for desired us" Functional As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Cell Tester Testing Lab "Used fordetermination ofEfficiency, FillFactor,Power, Voltage& Current ofSolar Cells." Functional (Wuhan Technology, China) "9 times in a month" "For PCRETactivity" 2 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A PV Module Tester Testing Lab "Used fordetermination ofEfficiency, FillFactor, Power,Voltage &Current etc. ofSolar PVModules." Functional "(Wuhan Technology, China)Capacity:300 W" "Approx 4 times in a month" 1. M/s Sunlife Pvt Ltd. Pakistan (6 Panels) 2. M/s Sunshine Energy (SMC),I-9, Islamabad.( 4 Panels) 3. M/s Mansha Brothers, Pvt Ltd, Isb 4. M/s NAB, Karachi 5. M/s Garrison Engineers (Army), Rwp. 6. M/s PPHI Sindh, Karachi. 7. M/s Garrison Engineers (A) Services, Peshawar Cantt 8. M/s Safroon Energy (PVT) LTD. 1st Floor, 46 Liberty Mall Tehkal, Peshawar. 9. M/s Office of the Executive Engineer, Development Authority, Muzaffarabad. 10. M/s Physical Planning and Housing Department, Construction and Maintenance Division, 1st Floor, Block 1,New District Headquarter Complex, Muzaffarabad. 11. M/s Office of the Director Electrical Local Council Board, Peshawar " 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Laboratory Press Plastic & Polymer/ACRC Sampling and Curing of elastomers and thermoplastic materials Working Gibitre S. No. PRE-2002039 None/ R& D None 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A FT-IR Spectroscopy Plastic & Polymer/ACRC Identification of material Working Thermo Nicolet AVATAR 320 FTIR 06-10 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Cell Tester Testing Lab Used fordetermination /Visualization /Detection ofcracks anddefected/broken parts aSolar Cells/Module" Functional (Wuhan Technology, China)Capacity:300 W 4 Times in a month 1. M/s PPHI Sindh, Karachi 2. M/s Garrison Engineers (A) Services, Peshawar Cantt. 3. M/s Garrison Engineers (Army), Rwp 4. M/s Safroon Energy (PVT) LTD. 1st Floor, 46 Liberty Mall Tehkal, Peshawar. 5. M/s Office of the Executive Engineer, Developme nt Authority, Muzaffarabad. 6. M/s Physical Planning and Housing Department, Constructio n and Maintenanc e Division, 1st Floor, Block 1, New District Headquarter Complex, Muzaffarabad. 7. M/s Office of the Director Electrical Local Council Board, Peshawar 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Impact Tester (Izod, Charpy, Tensile & DART) Plastic & Polymer/ACRC Impact test of Polymeric materials Working RESIL IMPACTOR, CEAST 02-03 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Impact Tester (Izod, Charpy, Tensile & DART) Plastic & Polymer/ACRC Impact test of Polymeric materials Working RESIL IMPACTOR, CEAST 02-03 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Moving Die Rheometer Plastic & Polymer/ACRC Curing time and temperature determination/ R & D Working Gibitre S.No. 2006040 Model Rheocheck Profile MD None/ R &D 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Melt Flow Index Thermo Haake Type-556-0031 MFI test of Polymeric beads Working Thermo Haake Type-556-0031 01-02 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Hardness Tester for Metal (Brinell, Vickers, Micro Vickers, Rock well and Universal) Plastic & Polymer/ ACRC Determination of Hardness of metallic samples Working 1. NEWAGE S. No.384 2. INDENTE 3. INDENTEC ZHV S. No. 073516-2007 4. INDENTEC S. No 073533 5. INDENTEC 1-2 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Hardness Tester for Rubber (Shore-A) ACRC Tool Co. Ltd Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Hardness Tester for Composite and Plastic (Shore-D) Plastic & Polymer/ACRC Determination of hardness of polymeric material Working S. No. 1833 Coats Machine Tool Co. Ltd. 2-4 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Oven Analytical Section ACRC For drying of glass ware and samples Working Sanfa 10-15 Public Sector Oil and Gas Sector Private Laboratories Textile and Allied Industries Automobile Industries Construction and Building Materials Engineering Sector Plastic, Polymer and Rubber Industries Pharma, Cosmetics and other chemical Industries Academia 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Furnace For sample heating Public Sector Oil and Gas Sector Private Laboratories Textile and Allied Industries Automobile Industries Construction and Building Materials Engineering Sector Plastic, Polymer and Rubber Industries Pharma, Cosmetics and other chemical Industries Academia Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Electrical Stirrer Analytical Section ACRC For stirring purpose Working 10-15 Public Sector Oil and Gas Sector Private Laboratories Textile and Allied Industries Automobile Industries Construction and Building Materials Engineering Sector Plastic, Polymer and Rubber Industries Pharma, Cosmetics and other chemical Industries Academia 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Melting Point Apparatus Plastic & Polymer/ACRC MP determination Working Electro thermal 9100 02-04 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Electro Analyzer Analytical Section ACRC PCSIR make Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Flame Photometer Analytical Section ACRC Testing of salt, cement, soil, urea, fertilizers etc Working but trouble shooting, Potassium filter and nebulizer needs repair Jenway 5-10 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A pH / ion meter Analytical Section ACRC pH testing of salt, cement, soil, fertilizers etc Working Fluoride and nitrate electrodes are malfunctioning Jenway 5-10 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Microwave Digestion (Auto pear) Analytical Section ACRC Sample Preparation for Creams, metals alloys, biological samples etc. Working, Instrument needs a UPS as recommended by supplier Anton paar 5-10 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Analytical Section ACRC Testing of Ores, Minerals, Metals and alloys, Lithium Bromide Chiller Solutions, , salt, soil, biological samples, cosmetics etc. Working but trouble shooting, Potassium filter and nebulizer needs repair Hitachi 30-40 NESPAK, Usmani, Pak Army, Pak Air Force, Pakistan Navy, NHA, Custom, Private sectors and etc 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Oscilloscope CDLE-Labs Graphical view of change of signals (real time) e.g voltages over time. Working=01 Not Working=02 Good Will Taiwan 02 In-house repair and R&D Activities 3 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Frequency Counter CDLE-Labs To measure the frequency of different signals Utilization: fundamental tool for R&D/Repair/test analysis Working Good Will Taiwan In-house repair and R&D Activities 3 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Digital multi meter CDLE-Labs To measure several electronic parameters e.g. resistance, voltage, current, capacitance etc. Working=01 Not Working=01 Fluke, USA KYRITSU Korea 02 M/s University of Swabi M/s University of Charsadda, KPK In-house repair and R&D Activities 02 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Helium Neon Laser Optics Lab For R&D / test analysis/ calibration/demonstrations in the field of optics Working 10mW 633nm Continuous activity for Spectrometry and instrument design R&D in Spectrometry and instrument design 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Masses (For Calibration) Calibration check of balances Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Rotary Evaporator Pesticide & POPs lab CES To concentrate the sample Working Buchi About 100 R&D & Analytical work 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Analytical Balance Kern Plant Tissue Culture Lab. Weighing samples Working Sartorious Germany, Mod: CP-225D R & D 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Grinding Mill Food and Feed Safety Lab Grinding of Sample Working Cyclotec 1093 120-500 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Cobb Tester Paper &Pulp lab CES For paper testing Analysis Working Lorentzen wetter Model.No.146 Once a month 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A GPS Air lab CES For Air Monitoring Working GPS 60,Germin 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Bomb Calorimeter Gallen Kamp Waste management CES To determine the energy contained in a substance Working Gallen Kamp 4 Agriculture,municiple,industrial,Biowaste industry,hospital waste 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Bio Process Equipment Waste management CES Production of energy from waste Working Locally Fabricated at pcsirKLC.Use for Bio-Methane potential in volume (ml) About 05 nos. experiment on lab scale. Energy industry,R&D Institute AND Universities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Blender ANEX Microbiology Sample blending Working Anex average 100 samples per month 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Analog/Linear IC tester Basic tool for Repair/Testing of Electronic equipment Working AVI, USA 1 In-house repair and R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A ECG Simulator CDLE Labs For calibration of ECG machine and ECG signal analysis /Simulation work Working Fluke, USA 02 M/s Kharadar Hospital, M/s HEJ , KU 02 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Auto Calve Shinva Medical,China For sterilization of equipments Working Auto Calve In house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Digital Calibrator Universal CDLE-Labs Calibration and testing of products Working PROVA , Taiwan 01 In house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A CNC-Turning Centre CNC Shop Turning and facing of shafts Working Lead-well Taiwan No production since last three years PSTC/in-house activities 02 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A CNC-Turning Centre (with milling attachment) CNC Shop Turning and facing of shafts with pocketing Working Lead-well Taiwan No production since last three years PSTC/ in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Lathe Machine CDLE- Workshop For threading and turning of shafts Working PMT(Local) 02 In-house repair and R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Digatron Battery Testing System Testing Lab Used to testBattery Capacity the terms ofthroughSimulation/Computerizedsystem" Functional (Digatron FiringCircuits, Germany) Capacity: 40 A Approx 4 times in a month 1. M/s NAB Karachi. 2. M/s Office of the Director Electrical Local Council Board, Peshawar 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Environmental Chamber Testing Lab Used to test PV Modules atdifferenttemperaturesand RelativeHumidity (RH) Functional Welltech Instru. Co.Hong Kong)Capacity: 150 W 4 times in a month For PCRETactivities 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A llluminometer Testing Lab Used to checksun insolation/irradiance/intensity" Functional jim-100 (KyoceraCorp. Japan)Capacity: upto1500W/m2 15 times in a month Used foroutdoor testing with otherequipments" 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Luxmeter Testing Lab Used for the ascertainment of the , neededbrightness of adevice Functional MS-1500 (ConradElectronic,Germany) Capacity:upto 40000 lux" 6 times in a month 1. M/s NAB, Karachi 2. M/s Office of the Director Electrical Local Council Board, Peshawar 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Geyser Testing System Testing Lab Used to testefficiency ofSolar Geyser Functional Capacity: Solar Geyser of any size/capacity 3 times in a month For PCRET use for R & Dactivities 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Battery Tester Testing Lab Used to find battery capacitythrough manualprocedure Functional SBS BCT-5000 (SBS Inc. USA)Capacity: upto 150 A 6 times in a month including PCRET activities 1. M/s NAB , Karachi 2. M/s Office of the Director Electrical Local Council Board, Peshawar 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Specific Gravity Meter Testing Lab Used tomeasure liquidgravity/ density Functional (SBS Inc. USA) 10 times in month including PCRET activities 1. M/s NAB , Karachi 2. M/s Office of the Director Electrical Local Council Board, Peshawar 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Variable Voltage Battery Charger (50 Volts, 50 A) Testing Lab Used to chargebattery upto 48Volts Functional Local made in Karachi, Pakistan 6 times in month For charging of PCRETBatteries 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A PV Module Tester Testing Lab Used to find FF & Efficiency of PV Modules Non Functional (Spectra Nova,Canada) Capacity:300 W N.A. N.A. 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A SPI Array Tester Testing Lab Used to find FF of PV Modulesby using l-VCurve Non Functional Spire Corp : .,upto USA 60 Kw N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Heat Resistive Vacuum System Advance PV Lab Used for ThinFilm Deposition(Thermal Evaporation)" Functional Germany /LEYBOLDSpecs: 220V, 50A" Depend on number of students and nature of work Students fromQAU, NUST,Hazara,Comsats,Islamic University, G.C University,Lahore, GIK University. 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Electron Beam Vacuum System Advance PV Lab Used for ThinFilm Deposition (Thermal Evaporation) Non-functional Germany /LEYBOLD Specs: 220V, 63A N.A. N.A. 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Gloves Box (old) Advance PV Lab Characterization Functional Pakistan/ Technico Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Gloves Box (new) Advance PV Lab Characterization Functional China Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Sun Simulator Advance PV Lab IVCharacterization Functional Canada/SF 150Specs: 220V,150W Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Hot plate with Stirrer Advance PV Lab Used forHomogeneousmixing ofsolutions Functional CorningSpecs: 220/240V,410/480W Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A. 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A 78 HW-1Hot plate with Stirrer Advance PV Lab Used forHomogeneousmixing ofsolutions Functional China Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A. 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Hot plate Advance PV Lab Heating Functional Pakistan/PCSIRSpecs: 0-350C Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Oven Advance PV Lab Heating One Functional & One Non functional 1. Blue M 2. GRIEVE 3. Model: NTR-800 4. Watt: 1000 W Volts: 230 V" 1)Depend on number of students and nature of work 2)N.A N.A 2 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Spin Coater Advance PV Lab Used for thinFilm Deposition Functional USA / VTC-100Specs: max 8000rpm Depend on number of students and nature of work NA 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A pH/ORP/EC/TDS/Salinity/DO/Pressure/Temperature Water Proof Meter NIO ORSS, Gwadar Water quality measurement Functional Hanna Model H198194 Multimeter Weekly R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Calibrator Fluke Calibration / Temperature Lab Calibration of T/C, RTD, Multimeter Out of order 5500 A, USA NA NA 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Dead Weight Tester Calibration / Pressure Lab Calibration of pressure Gauges, Safety values. Working Ashcraft, USA 12 1. M/s. Mohsin Match Factory (Pvt.) Ltd. 90-B, Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 2. M/s. PAKZONE Cosultants, A-1-1, Malik Nadeem Plaza Yousafabad Pull,Dalazak Road Peshawar. 3. M/s. Nisar Chishti M.R.(I.S.O) Associated Industries Ltd. Nowshera 4. M/s. Al- Badar MFG Gadoon Amazai 5. M/s. Injection (Pvt) Ltd. Plot No. 271 Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai KPK Pakistan. 6. M/s. Lasani Healthcare Gadoon Amazai Industrial Estate 29-A, R-1 Topi Swabi KPK. 7. M/s. Taj Syringes (Pvt) Ltd. Gadoon Swabi. 8. M/s. Royal Petrochemical Industries (Pvt) Ltd. 110 Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 9. M/s. Surgi Plast Plot No. 78, Road L-04, Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai. 10. M/s Bestway Cement Limited Plant Farooqia 12 km, Taxila-Haripur Road Farooqia Tehsil & District Haripur KPK Pakistan 11. Bestway Cement Limited Hattar Suraj Gali Road, Village Shadi Hattar Distt Haripur, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 12. M/s Kohat Cement Company Limited 37-P, Gulberg-II, Lahore-54660,Pakistan 13. M/s. Royal PVC Private Limited 113- Industrial Estate Jamrud Road Peshawar. 14. M/s. Philip Morris Pakistan Limited 22 KM-Mardan Swabi Road Mardan. On Behalf of Universal Scales Pvt. Ltd. 15. M/s. Bestway Cement Ltd.Chakwal Choa Saidan Shah Road Village Tatral Tehsil Choa Saidan Shah, District Chakwal Punjab Pakistan. 16. Shaheen Airport Services Bacha Khan International Airport Peshawar. 17. M/s. Alpha Pipe Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. Industrial Estate Gadoon Amazai Swabi. 18. M/s. UNISA Pvt. Ltd. Main G.T Road Adamzai, Akora Khattak District Nowshera. 19. M/s. Aries Pharmaceuticals (Pvt.) Ltd. 1-W, Hyatabad Industrial Estate Peshawar. 20. M/s. Links 2000 Amman Plaza Flat# 4, 4th Floor Johar Town Lahore Pakistan. 01 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Turbidity meter waterproof TN 100 NIO ORSS, Gwadar Turbidity measurement Functional Model: TN 100, make EU-Tech Instruments (part of thermo Gisher Scientific), Singapore Weekly R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Agilant Digital Multimeter Calibration / Electronics Lab. Calibration of (voltage, current) AC, DC, Resistance sources Working 34401 A 04 1. M/s. Transformer Technologies (Pvt.) Ltd. GT Road Taru Jabba Near Tarnab Farm Peshawar. 2. M/s Crescent Electronics Traders, Lahore on Behalf of M/s. Links 2000, 6-Civic centre Moon Market Faisal Town Lahore. 3. M/s. Associate & Development Mascot Consultant (JV) House # 602 Street # 36 Sector E-11 / 3 Islamabad. 4. M/s. Philip Morris22nd KM Mardan Swabi Road Mardan. 5. M/s. Hitech Network (Pvt) Ltd. 163-P Gulberg III Lahore Pakistan. 6. M/s.Pir Muhammad& Co. Govt Contractor & General Order Suppliers 1st Floor Zaib Plaza Tehkal Payan University Road Peshawar. 7. M/s. Imtiaz Wires & Cables Works Industry Near Habib Musjid Back Side PSO Petrol Pump G.T Road Amangarh Nowshera. 8. M/s. MAKKAYS Kulsum Plaza, 42 Jinnah Avenue, Islamabad. 9. M/s. Links 2000 Amman Plaza Flat# 4,4th Floor Johar Town Lahore Pakistan. 02 Director General 091-9216468 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A DIGITAL SIEVE SHAKER WITH ACCESSORIES EIGHT SIEVENS NIO ORSS, Gwadar Sediment size measurement Functional Model: BENTCH TOP PROTECTION CODE IP 54, OCTAGON, ENDECOTTS LTD LONDON, UK Depends on sediment samples collection R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Dip Coater Advance PV Lab Used for thinFilm Deposition Functional USA /PCTL-01 Specs: 220V, 1.5kW, 1100C Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Mobile Bridge Saw speedy cut PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop Sophisticated and delicate cutting of marble/granite blocks and slabs to make perfect unique designs of stone products. Working Italy Made FK/NC 1400 05 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Carbolite Furnace Advance PV Lab Used forannealing Functional UK / CSF 1200 Specs: 220V, 13A, 3.12kW Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Oven Universal NIO ORSS, Gwadar Drying samples Functional Model: XU058 France Etuves Internal dimentions Wdh:400x360x400mm Weight: 50 kg Once or twice a week R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Potentiostat PARSTAT 3000A Advance PV Lab haracterization . EIS Functional Specs /Ametek : 24V DC Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Keithly Source Meter Advance PV Lab IVCharacterization Functional USA / 2420 Specs: 240V, 240VA Max Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Garmin GPSMAP NIO ORSS, Gwadar Find location Functional 64s Handheld GPS In field only R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Fume Hood Advance PV Lab Wet area usage Non Functional Pakistan/ Technico N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Bath Sonicator Advance PV Lab Cleaningsamples Functional USA Specs: 220V, 2.3A, 250C Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Top Loading Balance NIO ORSS, Gwadar For weighing Functional Model: PA4202 Make Ohaus-USA Capacity: 4200 g In lab use R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A LCR HiTester Advance PV Lab Characterization Two Functional One Non Functional Japan Specs: 220/240V, 50VA Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Analytical Balance NIO ORSS, Gwadar For weighing Functional Model AS220R2 Origin RADWAG, POLAND In Lab use R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Weight Balance Advance PV Lab For measuring Weights Functional Germany/Japan Specs:0-120g Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 3 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Environmental Chamber Advance PV Lab Used for PVpanels testing ina specificenvironment Functional USA Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Vacuum Pumps Advance PV Lab Used tomaintainvacuum Non Functional Specs: 380 V N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Olympus Microscope Advance PV Lab Used forAnalyzing samples Functional BH-2 Specs: 220/240V,0.20/0.18A Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A SPECORD 200 Advance PV Lab Characterization Functional Germany/Analytik JenaSpecs: 230 V, 15A Depend on number of students and nature of work N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Lathe Machine CDLE- Workshop For threading and turning of shafts Working PMT(Local) 02 In-house repair and R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Diffusion Furnace Cell Processing Lab Used for n-layer doping Functional USA /Thermco Specs:180.5 kVA,60 PSI As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Plasma Etcher Cell Processing Lab Used for removing ndoping from edges Functional USA / PE-100 Specs: 220V, 13A, 85F As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Milling Machine Billet Conventional Machine Shop Cutting/pocketing of rectangular plates Working PAO FONG (Taiwan) PMTF (Pak) No production since last three years PSTC/ in-house activities 3 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Line Screen Printer Cell Processing Lab Used formetallization ofsilicon solarcells or creating contacts/interconnects Functional China / M26156- 1/UMSpecs: 380V, 50kW Daily Use N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Spot Welding Machine CDLE- Workshop For welding in spots like riveting with precision Working PMT(Local) 01 In-house repair and R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Conveyer Furnace Cell Processing Lab Used for Firingpurposes Functional USA/DespatchSpecs: 25-250in/min, 100-1000C,1700 wafers/hr Daily use N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A RO System Cell Processing Lab sed Deionized water Functional Pakistan/SAGE Daily Use N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Marble Cutting & Sectioning Machine PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop For simple cutting and sectioning of stone tiles and strips, used to train the youth and make stone/marble products. Working Local made Pakistan Blade Size: 18 Table Size Lenth:7.5 Width:3 12 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Fume hood Cell Processing Lab Wet area usage Non Functional Pakistan/ Technico N.A N.A 2 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Hydraulic Portable Blade Cutter PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop Used for Cutting of different sinks, baths and kitchen tops etc. Working Italy made Blade Size: 7 02 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Radial Drill Machine CDLE- Workshop For making hole and radius in tapper Working PMT(Local) 01 In-house repair and R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Air Compressor Watering Lab Used to providehigh pressure airto Machinery Functional (Chinese Make) As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Wire Saw Watering Lab Used to cutpseudo squarecrystal into thin Wafers Non-functional Meyer Burger DS 264220x220mm wafersof 300 micronthickness N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Sector Multi Speed Portable Router PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop Used to make edges of stones and granite products. Working Italy made 03 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Squaring Saw Watering Lab Used to cut offsides ofcylindricalcrystal to make itpseudo square Non Functional Arnold Germany 72/475156mm width 410 mm length N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Arm polishing machine PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop Used for polishing of stone slabs, training and products. Working Italy made Mod: RAP600-CE 06 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Universal Cutting Saw Watering Lab head Used toand cut tail from Silicon Ingot Non Functional Arnold Germany 72/452 230mm Diameterand 1800mm length N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Slurry Mixer Watering Lab Used to Mixslurry to makesure it doesntsettle at thebottom of the tank Functional (Custom made) Almost 15 jobs per month N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Turning /Lath Machines PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop Lathe work in stone processing is a must for cylindrical products, pedestals, vases, stairs etc. Working Local made Pakistan Bed Size: 3.5 ft 02 Nos Bed Size: 06 ft 02 Nos Bed Size: 10 ft 01 Nos 05 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 05 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Crystal Growth Machine 6000 Crystal Growth Lab Used for Silicon Crystal Growth Non Functional Kayex CG-6000 USA N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Diesel Generator Crystal Growth Lab Backup powersource- CG LabSupport Functional Capacity: 500 KVAModel-ACQ 550Eng: CumminsMade: Turkey As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A U.P.S Crystal Growth Lab Backup powersource- CG LabSupport Non Functional 450 KVAModel: MGE-Galaxy 7000APC N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Water Chiller Crystal Growth Lab Used to providecool water forcooling of CGMachine- CGLab Support Functional InterklimaModel: MM091008Cooling Capacityflow rate 18.456L/H As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Vacuum Pump Crystal Growth Lab Used to createvacuum-CG Lab Support Functional Model: KTC-112S/No. 101552636 Made-USA As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Air Compressor Crystal Growth Lab CG Lab Support Functional RENNERModel: Nr. 323059. Max Air Pressure- 220psi. Air dryer: 2 to 55c . Made: Germany. As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Water Pumps Crystal Growth Lab CG Lab Support Functional KSB:3 kW.Model: 700065068 As per requirement N.A 2 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Portable Grinding machine PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop To grind surface and edges of stones. Working 1-Germany made AG 230S 10 NAVTTC, FDA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 02 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Weighing Balance Crystal Growth Lab CG Lab Support Functional local made in Pakistan As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Crystal Puller Crystal Growth Lab Used for Silicon Crystal Growth Functional CG 3000 As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Weighing Balance Crystal Growth Lab CG Lab Support Functional 60 Kg As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar System Small Hydro Power (SHP) Research Lab , Islamabad HybridElectrificationResearchPurpose Functional 2kW . Solar PV System As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A MHP Plant Small Hydro Power (SHP) Research Lab , Islamabad HybridElectrificationResearchPurpose Functional 15kW Micro Hydro System As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Portable Drilling machine PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop To make holes in stones. Working Germany made TE 2-M 10 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Wind Turbines System Small Hydro Power (SHP) Research Lab , Islamabad HybridElectrificationResearchPurpose Non Functional 3kW Wind Energy System N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Shearing Machine Fitting Shop For cutting the sheets Working China Pak 15-20 in-house activities 02 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Crane Lifter Mechanical workshop of SHP/MHP at R/O Peshawar Used to lift theequipments &Parts with in theWorkshop Functional ACECO,Douglassviile, PA As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Sheet Bending Machine (Manual) Fitting Shop For bending the sheets Working Pak 04 in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Turbine Balancing Machine Mechanical workshop of SHP/MHP at R/O Peshawar Used forBalancing HydroTurbines Non Functional Balance Technology Inc. Serial No: 8010220. Model No: H835000RTANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Sheet Rolling Machine (Manual) Fitting Shop For rolling the sheets manually Working Pak 01-02 in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Sheet Rolling Machine (Auto Heavy work) Fitting Shop For rolling the sheets automatically Working England 01-02 in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Surface Grinding Machine Mechanical workshop of SHP/MHP at R/O Peshawar Used for cleaning surfaceof metal parts of Turbine Functional HARIG 618 AutomaticWALKERCERAMAX, USA As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Gas Cutting Machine Fitting Shop Cutting the sheets with help of gas Working Pak 01-02 in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Lathe Machine Mechanical workshop of SHP/MHP at R/O Peshawar Used forassembling & finishing mechanicalparts ofTurbines 01 Functional 01 Non Functional 1. TURNMASTER-18x60 2. TURNMASTER- 21x80 As per requirement N.A 2 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Engraving Machine PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop Engraving on stone products and to make designs on Stones Working China Dia 06mm 05 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 03 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Compressor 1.5 ton CNC Shop For building air pressure in air reservoir tank Working Ingersoll-Rand Works along with CNC in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Portable Sass Welding Set Workshop For welding the samples Working Pak 04-05 in-house activities 04-05 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Compression Testing Machine. PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop To test compressive strength of stone. Working Ogawa Japan E1559100 230-240 V 50Hz 5.1A 1445rpm 05 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Welding Transformer (Heavy) Workshop For making required current for welding purpose Working Imported 10 in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Welding Torch (Gas Welding) Workshop For cutting purposes Working Imported 05 in-house activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Milling Machine Mechanical workshop of SHP/MHP at R/O Peshawar Used for drilling turbineequipment Non Functional Bridgeport, Series IISpecial Model no. F537, US Electric Motor N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Pulper Refiner Food Pilot Plant For making fruit pulp Working 50 Ltr. Motor 10 hp, Variable speed with agitator In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Filling Machine Food Pilot Plant For filling liquid in packages Working Cap. 5ml -500ml with conveyor turn table In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Cane Steamer Food Pilot Plant For packing sample in tin form Working Cap. 250 gm 01kg In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Sheet Cutter Machine Mechanical workshop of SHP/MHP at R/O Peshawar Used for cuttingIron sheets forassembling Penstock Pipe Non Functional FAMCO Machine division Model No. 796. Serial No: S-06895410. Capacity: 3/16 MILDSTEEL, USA N.A N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Reverse Osmoses unit Food Pilot Plant For making Raw water to potable form Working Cap. 50 ltr./hour In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Flexural Testing Machine PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop To test the abrasion of ceramic tiles samples. Working Ogawa Japan C095 Manual 05 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Reaction Mixer Tank (Double Jacketed) Food Pilot Plant For making chemical product Working Cap. 500Lit. with gear motor make SS In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Peshawar) N/A Abrasive Meter (Abrasion Testing Machine) PCSIR Labs. Complex, Peshawar Dimension Stones Centre/ Workshop For abrasion testing Working Ogawa Japan A109 230-240 V 50Hz 2.2A 860rpm 05 NAVTTC, FATA-DA and private sector (Local Marble Industries) etc. 01 Director General 091-9216468 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Vacuum Concentrator (Steam Jacketed) Food Pilot Plant For removal of impurities from product Working Cap. 250Lit In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Thermo breaker Food Pilot Plant Temperature enhancement Working In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Concentrator General Pilot Plant For removal of impurities from product Working Cap. 50Lit. with heat exchange motor make SS In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Cabinet Dryer (New Gas & Electric) General Pilot Plant For drying the wet product Working No. of tray 10 In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Exchanger General Pilot Plant For heating purpose Working In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Bristol Packing Machine General Pilot Plant For packaging of tablet/capsule Working Type Aluminum PVC Range 15-20 stroke/min Size 140mm blister sheet In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Fluidized Bed Dryer General Pilot Plant For drying the powder/granules Working In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Compressive Strength Machine General Pilot Plant Determination of tensile strength Working In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Plat Frame Filter Press General Pilot Plant For removal of solid palettes Working No. of Plates=18 No. of Frames=18 In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Piping Test Machine General Pilot Plant Hydrostatic pressure test machine for HDPE pipe Working Pressure range 0-10MPa Size 1" - 14 " 03 In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Penstock Roller Machine Mechanical workshop of SHP/MHP at R/O Peshawar Used forassembling and manufacturingof Penstock Pipes Functional National machine tool builders association Model No: 12075 Serial No: 089012 Approx machine Wt.37000 Total HP. 40, USA As per requirements N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Material Transfer &Filtration Pump General Pilot Plant Transfer of slurry particles Working Power 01hp In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Hydraulic Press Machine Mechanical workshop of SHP/MHP at R/O Peshawar Used forforcefullypressing ofturbines metal to 5000psi Functional REXROTA Pressure adjustment range: 350-5000psi 24.1- 345bar Proof pressure: 1000psi, 690 bar California, USA As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Spray Dryer General Pilot Plant For drying of liquid Working Cap. 5-20kg/hr Inlet Temp.1400C Outlet temp. 800C In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Solvent Extraction Unit General Pilot Plant For extraction of sample Working Cap. 25kg/Batch made of SS In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Lathe Machines Workshop Machining work in workshop Functional PECO- BL-115 No. 7244 Bed Length= 4 feet Between Center= 2 feet PMTF- C- 4-00091 Bed Length= 6 feet Between Center= 3 feet As per requirement N.A 2+2 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Drill Machine Workshop Making holes in workpiece Functional Local MadeVertical Drilling Machine As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Vacuum Filtration Units General Pilot Plant Removal of solid particles from liquid Working Cap. 200lit/hr open top with perforated plates and premium pump In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Plate and Frame Filter General Pilot Plant Removal of solid particles from liquid Working Cap. 50Lit./hr Pump 2hp In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Flash Point Apparatus Q.C. Lab. Pilot Plant Testing of flash point of samples Working Grabna Instrument 10-4000C In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Viscometer Q.C. Lab. Pilot Plant For moisture control in sample Working In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Milling Machine Workshop Machining work Functional Pak-ORELIKON PMTFK4U-00240 As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Moisture Des Termination Balance. Q.C. Lab. Pilot Plant For moisture control in sample Working Moisture Range 0-100% Cap. 5-70gm In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Press Machine Workshop Cutting, Bending Sheet Functional Local Made Heavy Duty Press Machine As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Viscometer Tube, UbBelohde Q.C. Lab. Pilot Plant Determination of Viscosity Working In-house R&D Activities Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Boaring Machine Workshop Sheet Boaring Functional Pak-ORELIKON PMTFH4-00030 Boaring Capacity= 1inch As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Bending Machine Workshop Bending Sheet Functional Haji & Sons Lahore Length = 6 feet As per requirement N.A 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Muffle Furnace & Accessories General Pilot Plant Ash determination for food sample used for both analytical services and research projects. Working Temp. Range 100-12000C In-house R&D Activities 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar PV System- 5kW NOT MENTIONED For electrification of office Functional PV Panel (250-300 W)- 5kW (Make: PCRET) Inverter (Hybrid-MPPT)- 5kW (Make: Baykee) Batteries: Dry Battery, 12V 200 Ah (Make: Baykee)- 4 Nos. Cell: Lead Acid Cell, 2V 600 Ah (Make: Exide), 48 Nos 3 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Spectrophotometer Food Technology and Nutrition Section, Plant Tissue Culture Sugar, vitamins, poly phenols, color, diastase activity, HMF in food matrices used for R&D and analytical services Working Thermo Evolution 300, Model Bio Spectrometer Basic Frequent use 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A DC System NOT MENTIONED For electrification of street and garden lights inside PCRET office. Functional 2 x Batteries (12, 200 Ah) 4 x Panel (250 Watts) 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Sample Homogenizer Microbiology Basic equipment used in the preparation of sample preparation prior to determination of all parameters in food. Working Inter science technology R & D, Frequent usage, average 100 samples per month 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Auto Tracking System NOT MENTIONED Dripping system for garden and for water storage Functional 2.5 kW Motor (Make: China) 2.5 kW PV Panel (Make: PCRET) Auto Tracker 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Gas chromatography Food Technology and Nutrition Section Fatty acid profile, cholesterol in food samples used for R&D and analytical services Working Shimadzu GC-2010 15-30 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar PV Panel NOT MENTIONED For power generation Functional Mono/Poly Crystalline 100, 150, 200, 250 and 300 W PV Panels Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Gas chromatography Food Technology and Nutrition Section Fatty acid profile, cholesterol in food samples used for R&D and analytical services Working Shimadzu GC-2010 15-30 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Rickshaw- 1 NOT MENTIONED For indoor transportation Functional Capacity- 5 Seats Batteries- 5 x 12V, 40 Ah PV Module- Flexible 300 W" 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Rickshaw- 2 NOT MENTIONED For indoor transportation Functional Capacity- 5 Seats Batteries- 5 x 12V, 48 Ah PV Module- Flexible 200 W 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Model House NOT MENTIONED DC System for demonstration purpose. Functional 200 Watt DC System with 12 hours Backup 1 x 200 Watt PV Panel 1 x 100 Ah Battery 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Biogas Plant NOT MENTIONED For production of Biogas for cooking purpose Functional Specs: 2 x 2m3 2 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Green House Dryer NOT MENTIONED For drying of fruits and vegetables Functional Specs: 200-300 kg capacit 1 Dr. Afzal Hussain Director 051-9265356 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Suction pump use for filtration assembly NIO ORSS, Gwadar For suction seawater Functional Model: Rocker 410 Make Taiwan Scientific, Taiwan Flow rate 20 L/min Twice a week R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Filtering Assembly NIO ORSS, Gwadar For filtering water Functional Model: VF3 Rocker Scientific, Taiwan Twice a week R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A STAINLESS MANIFOLDS 3 PLACES WITH ACCESSORIES AND VACUUM PUMP NIO ORSS, Gwadar Multi channel Filtration Assembly Functional 300-MS, 3-Place Stainless Steel Manifold with accessories and oil free vacuum pump R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Magnetic hot plate stirrer analog NIO ORSS, Gwadar To increase chemical reaction and drying samples Functional Model: MS-H-S, MAKE Dragon Lab, USA R & D work 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A UV-Visible Spectrophotometer Chemical Oceanography & Marine Environment Nutrients and Chlorophyll determination /Analysis of Organic & Organo-metallic Compounds Functional Agilent Technologies Cary Series UV-Vis Spectrophotometer 10 Preparation for ISO certification in progress 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Gas Chromatograph Quantitative and qualitative determination of Organic Contaminants Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs), Dioxin, PCBs, Chlorinated Pesticides Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbon (PAHs) Total Petroleum Hydrocarbon (TPHC Functional Agilent Technologies Intuvo 9000 GC System 5977B MSD 8 Preparation for ISO certification in progress 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrometer Heavy Metals analysis in all matrices Arsenic and Mercury contamination Heavy Metals analysis using following Flame and Flameless Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AA) technique in variety matrixes Functional PerkinElmer PinAAcle 900T 8 Preparation for ISO certification in progress 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A ADCP Physical Section To measure under water current velocities over a depth range Functional Flow Quest 1000 Depend on the requirement of data SWI 6 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Tide Gauge Physical Section To measure tide level Functional Valeport MIDAS SWI 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A HPLC Food Technology and Nutrition Section, Food and Feed Safety Lab. Sugar profile, vitamin profile, antioxidants, preservatives, food color identification in food samples used for R&D and analytical services Working Shimadzu, Merck-Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan 15-50 02 Director General 021-99261922 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Tide and Wave Recorder Physical Section For measuring tide and waves Functional Model TWR-2050 SWI 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Amino Acid Analyzer Food Technology and Nutrition Section Amino acid profile in proteins and foods Samples used for R&D and analytical services Working Shimadzu VP 10-20 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Ferinogrpah Meter Food Technology and Nutrition Section Moisture absorption, dough strength, and flour quality assessment Working Brabender 2-5 1 Director General 021-99261922 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A CTD Physical Section For measure conductivity,temperature and depth Functional Valeport MIDAS + SWI 02 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Falling Number Food Technology and Nutrition Section Amylase activity of flour to assess the rheological properties of bread. Working 2-5 1 Director General 021-99261922 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Weather Station Physical Section For weather data Functional Vantage Pro 2/ Davis Instruments SWI 1 Dr. Asif Inam Director General 021-99251179 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Refractometer Food Technology and Nutrition Section, Aquaculture Brix, total solid and B.R value of fat determination in food samples. 01 working 01 out of order Abbe 10494/10480, Atago S/Mill-E, Japan R & D work 02 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Colony counter Microbiology, Nematology, Applied Biology Lab. Used for counting microbial colonies on different enumeration and selective media Working GallenKamp R & D, Frequent usage, average 100 samples per month 3 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Thermocycler Gradient Microbiology Used for amplification of microbial DNAs through polymerase chain reaction for identification of different bacteria and genes e.g. GMOs Working BIO-RAD, icycler R & D, On average 25 samples for GMO and Salmonella analysis per month. 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A UV / VIS Spectrophotometer Analytical Centre-I UV / Vis spectrophotometer uses visible light and ultraviolet to analyze the chemical structure of substance. It is used to measure the intensity of light, and the intensity is proportional to the wavelength. Working ? UV-Vis Spectrophotometer-200 Specord ? UV-Vis Spectrophotometer, Thermo Scientific Uv-Vis Genesys 10S 100 times/month M/s. AGP Pharmaceutical M/s. Gets Pharma M/s. Zafa Pharmaceutical M/s. Searle Pakistan M/s. Reign Pharmaceuticals M/s. Espoir Pharma M/s. Addmore Cosmetics M/s. Ahmed Foods (Pvt.) Ltd. M/s. Mehran Spice & Food Industries M/s. Shan Foods (Pvt.) Ltd. M/s. Convenience Food Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. 02 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Incubators 1) Pharmacology 2) Biochemistry & Biotechnology Used for incubation of petri plates and/or test tubes with bacteriological media inoculated with different samples/microorganisms, required for microbiological analyses of samples Working 1) Memmert 2) Memmert 3) Binder Regular use whole month Pharmaceutical industries & R&D 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Cold Centrifuge Biochemistry & Biotech Used to separate substances of greater and lesser density at low temperatures. Working Sigma 2-5 R&D 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Disintegration Apparatus Biochemistry & Biotech To determine whether tablets or capsules disintegrate within the prescribed time when placed in a liquid medium under the experimental conditions. Working ERWEKA ZT-503 2-3 M/s. AGP Pharmaceutical M/s. Gets Pharma M/s. Zafa Pharmaceutical M/s. Searle Pakistan 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Dissolution Apparatus Biochemistry & Biotech Used to test a pharmaceutical product to evaluate the rate of release of a drug substance from the dosage form. Working Pharma Test GmbH Paddle Type (06 buckets) 2-3 M/s. AGP Pharmaceutical M/s. Gets Pharma M/s. Zafa Pharmaceutical 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Grip Strength Pharmacology To measure grip strength, which measures force. It can record forces over a wide spectrum. Working Used for CNS activity UGO-Basile 47105-001 1-2 months R&D 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A HPLC /PDA/Flourescence Detector It is a chromatographic technique used to split a mixture of compounds in the fields of chemistry, biochemistry and pharmaceutical industries. The main purposes for using HPLC are for identifying, quantifying and purifying the individual components of the mixture. Working ? HPLC Perkin-Elmar-Series-200 ? Shimadzu LC 20AT (HPLC/PDA) Whole month M/s. M.A. Proteins M/s. Model Customs M/s. Sind Feed & Allied Products M/s. A.U. Fisheries M/s. Taj Fisheries (Pvt.) Ltd. M/s. PharmEvo (Pvt.) Limited M/s. Ahmed Foods (Pvt.) Ltd. M/s. Mehran Spice & Food Industries M/s. Shan Foods (Pvt.) Ltd. M/s. Convenience Food Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. M/s. Reign Pharmaceuticals (Pvt.) Ltd. M/s. Animal Quarantine Department M/s. Uniteam (Pvt.) Ltd. 02 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Microscope 1) Diagnostic Lab 2) Biochemistry & Biotechnology To produce magnified visual or photographic (including digital) images of objects or specimens that are too small to be seen with the naked eye. Working Labomed 15-18 days For Pathological Lab 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Microtech (Clinical Analyzer) Diagnostic Lab To determine the concentration of certain metabolites, electrolytes, proteins, and/or drugs in samples of serum, plasma, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, and/or other body fluids. Working Clini Lab 200 18-20 days Referred Pathological test referred by Doctors 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Rota Rod Apparatus Pharmacology Used to assess the effect of a drug on animal behavior Working LE-8200 PanLab S.I. 1-2 times per month R&D work 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Stability Chamber Biochemistry & Biotech To test and store a wide range of products in specific temperature and/or humidity conditions for shelf life testing. Working Binder GmbH For stability study of drugs, consumables, nutraceuticals 01/03 months M/s. Hamdard M/s. Platinum Pharma M/s. Pepsi Cola 01 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Tablet Density Meter Biochemistry & Biotech To measure the density. Working Dr. Schieuniger JV-2000 03 times/month M/s. AGP Pharmaceutical M/s. Gets Pharma M/s. Zafa Pharmaceutical M/s. Searle Pakistan 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Tablet Friability Meter Biochemistry & Biotech To measure the friability of tablets. Working ERWEKA TAR-200 03 times/month M/s. AGP Pharmaceutical M/s. Gets Pharma M/s. Zafa Pharmaceutical M/s. Searle Pakistan 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Tablet hardness Tester Biochemistry & Biotech To measure the hardness of tablets. Working Dr. Schieuniger 8M 03 times/month M/s. AGP Pharmaceutical M/s. Gets Pharma M/s. Zafa Pharmaceutical M/s. Searle Pakistan 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Vortex Mixe Biochemistry & Biotech To mix small vials of liquid Working 1KA MS2 30 Normal use 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A ELIZA Reader Analytical Centre For measuring antibody tests Working Labtech, LT 4500 05 times/month 1 Director General 021-99261922 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer AAS Lab Analysis of trace elements/heavy metals in water ANALYTIK JENA AG (Germany), Model AAS VARIO 6 45 4 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A UV-Visible Spectrophotometer Spectrophotometer Lab Analysis of Nitrate, Nitrite Fluoride, Iron, Sulphate, Ammonia etc. Model SPECORD 200 PC, Analytikjena AG, Germany, Double beam with Computer P-III, Printer and Software 42 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Colorimeter Spectrophotometer Lab For the anal sis of Sulphates. Phosphates HACH DR/890 154 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Colorimeter Chemical Lab 1 For the anal sis of Sulphates. Phosphates HACH DR/2800 154 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A pH meter Chemical Lab 1 To measure the acidic and basic nature of water sample HI-210 HANNA Italy 152 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Flame photometer Chemical Lab 1 To measure the concentration of cations (Na, K , Li etc.) Model PFP-7, JENWAY, UK 199 2 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Flame photometer Chemical Lab 1 To measure the concentration of cations (Na, K , Li etc.) DV-710WNT Lab/Gio De Vita Italy 199 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Balance Chemical Lab 1 To weigh the sample/ chemical 200, DS,USA 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Conductivity Meter Chemical Lab 1 Measurement re the electrical conductivity of water sample Model 4320 Jenway, UK 154 2 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Chlorine Meter Chemical Lab 1 Measurement the concentration of free and total chlorine HI 93734 19 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Turbidity Meter Chemical Lab 1 To measure the turbity Model HI-93703C, HANNA, Italy 148 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Turbidity Meter Chemical Lab 1 To measure the turbity Lovibond 148 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Temp. & Humidity Meter Measurement the temperature and humidity Model HI-8564, HANNA, Italy 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Hot air oven Chemical Lab 1 To dry the glassware and chemicals Local 100 L capacity Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Distillation system Ro Unit Preparation of distillation Model WDA/4, Glass LTD U.K 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Analytical Balance To weigh chemicals for reagent preparation 0.1 mg, 100 gm., SARTORIOUS 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Analytical Balance To weigh chemicals for reagent preparation 4C-503 Sartorious 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A COD Apparatus Wastewater Lab Measurement of the Chemical Oxygen Demand in wastewater HACH COD System Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Magnetic Stirrer and hot plate Wastewater Lab To heat and stir the sample/solution to Velp Scientifica, Italy 42 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Total Organic Carbon Analyzer Wastewater Lab Measurement the Total Organic Carbon in water sample. O.I.Analytical Aurora Model 1030 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Microwave Digester Wastewater Lab Digestion of wastewater sample before metal analysis 25 Anton Paar 3000 Digester, Austria 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Chemical Oxygen Demand Apparatus Wastewater Lab Measurement of the Chemical Oxygen Demand Lovibond ET 125 SC Germany 12 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A BOD Measurement System Wastewater Lab Measurement of Biochemical Oxygen Demand in wastewater FTC 225E Velp Scientifica Italy 12 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Centrifuge Wastewater Lab To seperate the contents from the solution mixture NE020GT/I Nickel Electro, UK 10 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Dissolved Oxygen Meter Wastewater Lab Measurement of the Dissolve Oxygen in water sample 970 jenway UK 15 2 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Soxhlet Extraction System Organic Lab Extraction of organic compound from plant or soil SER-148/6 Velp Italy 20 samples 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Ultra Sonic Bath Organic Lab To sonicate the sample/solution Soniclean Australia Study Project: 1. United Nations University-IAS Monitoring of POPS in Asia 2. Surface Water Monitoring Program 2017-2018 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Muffle Furnace Organic Lab To heat the sample at elevated temperature LEF-115S Labtech, Korea Study Project: 1. United Nations University-IAS Monitoring of POPS in Asia 2. Surface Water Monitoring Program 2017-2018 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Vortex Mixer To mix/homogenize the sample Taiwan Study Project: 1. United Nations University-IAS Monitoring of POPS in Asia 2. Surface Water Monitoring Program 2017-2018 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Rotatory Evaporator Organic Lab To Concentrate the Organic Sample Velp Italy Study Project: 1. United Nations University-IAS Monitoring of POPS in Asia 2. Surface Water Monitoring Program 2017- 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Gas chromatography Mass spectrometry GCMS Organic Lab Analysis of volatile Organic Compounds like persistent organic pollutants (POPs), pesticides, herbicides etc. QP 2010 Shimadzu Japan Study Project: 1. United Nations University-IASMonitoring of POPS in Asia 2. Surface Water Monitoring Program 2017-2018 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Nitrogen sample concentrator Organic Lab To concentrate organic sample MD 200 Study Project: 1. United Nations University-IAS Monitoring of POPS in Asia 2. Surface Water Monitoring Program 2017-2018 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Grinder Wastewater Lab To grind the plant material Ploymix Kinematica AG Study Project: 1. United Nations University-IAS Monitoring of POPS in Asia 2. Surface Water Monitoring Program 2017-2018 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Filtration Assambly Used in Membrane filtration of samples Novagen & Waters Study Project: 1. United Nations University-IAS Monitoring of POPS in Asia 2. Surface Water Monitoring Program 2017- 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Acid Fume Hood Used for sample/solution preparation Lab Tech, LFH-1205C1 1 Mrs. Hifza Rasheed Director 051-9101274 Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A Computers (Corei5) IT Section To conduct trainings on differentR&D topics for researchers fromUniversities & R&D Organizations. Functional Dell Three (3) to Four(4) Trainings Level: National Participants:-100+ Quaid-i-Azam University,Islamabad,Pakistan National University of Modern Languages Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University Capital University of Science and Technology, Islamabad Pakistan Institute of Development Economics, Islamabad Foundation University Islamabad Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad International non-governmental organization (INGO) Islamia College, Peshawar Govt Degree College, Mardan Ministry of Planning and Development International Islamic University,Islamabad School of Systems and Technology, University of Management and Technology, lahore Bahauddin Zakariya University,Multan Hazara University,Mansehra University Of Sargodha Air University, Islamabad MERCY CORPS PAKISTAN National Institute Of Pakistan Studies,(Nips) University of Peshawar Holy Family Hospital, Rawalpindi National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Islamabad Riphah International University, Islamabad Rawalpindi Medical University Agricultural University Peshawar Pakistan Museum of Natural History,lslamabad Pakistan Science Foundation,Islamabad Fatima Jinnah Women University, Rawalpindi NORI Hospital K R L Hospital Islamabad COMSATS University, Islamabad University of Balochistan, Quetta E-ln-C Brach (R&S DTE) GHQ Rawalpindi Quaid-i-Azam Public Libraary Quetta Govt Degree College, Qalanderabad COMSATS University, Lahore Balochistan Residential College BRC Loralai National Development Complex, Wah Cantt GHQ Rawalpindi Mehran Upiversty of Engineering and Technology, Khairpur Mehran Universty of Engineering and Technology, Jamshoro Govt Unviversity of AJK, Muzaffarabad Univesity of Sindh Jamshoro Ministry of Science and Technology UET Taxila AJK Medical College Muzaffarabad Higer Education Comission,Islamaabd Balochistan University of IT,Quetta Pakistan Council for Science and Technology, Islamaabd Quaid-i-Azam University of Eng FAST National University Lahore 28 Mr. Saifullah Azim Principal System Analyst 0333-9248111 Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A Computers (Corei7) Digital library Searching lab To provide digital library searchingfacility to researchers, (Mainlyfaculty/students of universities) Functional HP - 800 Students Quaid-I-Azam University COMSATS, Islamabad Pakistan Institute ofDevelopment Economics National Institute OfPakistan Studies, (Nips) 14 Mr. Saifullah Azim Principal System Analyst 0333-9248111 Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A Scanning Lab (High Speed scanner) Scanning Lab (Library Section) Functional To scan scientific content for thedevelopment of National ScientificDigital Repository. (Can be of usedby all S&T organizations) -1000 Pages PASTIC NationalCentre Pakistan ScienceFoundation Ministry of Science andTechnology and its attached department 2 Mr. Saifullah Azim Principal System Analyst 0333-9248111 Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A Printing Press with 1 State-of-theArt High Speed Printing Machine, 2 Offset printing machines, 1 each of automatic folding, Binding and its organizations, universities and other Cutting machines Reprographic Section To print In house publications anddisseminate to scientific community. The service is also extended to MoST and its organizations, universities and other R&D organizations. Functional 10 Quaid-I-Azam University Intellectual Property Organization NUST College of EME Pakistan Science Foundation Ministry of Science and Technology Pakistan Council for Science and Technology (PCST) Natural science linkage programme- PSF Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources (PCRWR) Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Centre Benazir Income Support Programme Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience International College for Women Sakardu Council Of Islamic Ideology Pakistan Council Renewable Energy Technologies Sustainable Tourism Foundation Pakistan (STFP) CDA model School 6 Mr. Saifullah Azim Principal System Analyst 0333-9248111 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Universal Testing Machine Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) For determination of mechanical SteelBar test Yield strength Ultimatestrength, Elongation, Bend Test. Functional MachineCapacity 1800kN load Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan AtomicEnergy Commission (PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt. Ltd. iii. M/s. Ziauddin ConstructionCompany Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steelPvt. Ltd. v. M/s. UrbanProperties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T Properties Pvt. Ltd 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Compressive Machine Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) This machine is used in malty purposei.e. compressive test compressive test ofconcrete cylinder compressive test ofblock compressive. Test of pavers. Functional Capacity 200tons load Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan AtomicEnergy Commission (PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt. Ltd. iii. M/s. Ziauddin Construction Company Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steel Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. UrbanProperties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T Properties Pvt. Ltd 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Capping Cylindrical Concrete Specimen Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) This equipment is used for providingplain surface on the end of concretehardened cylinder or drilled concretecore, when the end surface does notconfirmed with the plainness. Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan AtomicEnergy Commission (PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt.Ltd. iii. M/s. Ziauddin ConstructionCompany Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steelPvt. Ltd. v. M/s. UrbanProperties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T PropertiesPvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Vicat Apparatus Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) This apparatus is used to determinephysical properties of cement i.e.normal consistency of cement initial andfinal setting time of cement. Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job i. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt. Ltd. iii. M/s. Ziauddin Construction Company Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steel Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. Urban Properties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T Properties Pvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Blain Air Permeability Apparatus Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) This apparatus is used for determine cement fines. Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt. Ltd. iii. M/s. Ziauddin Construction Company Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steel Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. Urban Properties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T Properties Pvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Leachatilers Apparatus Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) The function of this apparatus is to determine soundness of cement. Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan AtomicEnergy Commission(PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt.Ltd. iii. M/s. ZiauddinConstructionCompany Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steel Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. UrbanProperties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T PropertiesPvt. Ltd 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Vibrating Casting Mortar Apparatus Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) The function of this apparatus is to castmortar as per BS standard for cementcompressive strength testing. Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan AtomicEnergy Commission(PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt.Ltd. iii. M/s. ZiauddinConstructionCompany Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steelPvt. Ltd. v. M/s. UrbanProperties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T PropertiesPvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Versa Compressive Machine Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) The function of this machine is multypurpose i.e. compressive strength ofcement mortar, compressive strength ofconcrete split tensile strength of pavers. Functional 3000 kg Load Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan AtomicEnergy Commission (PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt. Ltd. iii. M/s. ZiauddinConstructionCompany Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steelPvt. Ltd. v. M/s. UrbanProperties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T Properties Pvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Abrasion Machine Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) The function of this machine todetermine abrasion property of tile and marbles Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan AtomicEnergy Commission(PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt.Ltd. iii. M/s. ZiauddinConstructionCompany Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steelPvt. Ltd. v. M/s. UrbanProperties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T PropertiesPvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Impact Apparatus Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) The purpose of this apparatus is todetermine impact value of aggregate. Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan AtomicEnergy Commission(PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt.Ltd. iii. M/s. ZiauddinConstructionCompany Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steelPvt. Ltd. v. M/s. UrbanProperties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T PropertiesPvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Core Cutting Machine Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) This machine is used to drilled core ofhardened concrete in cylindrical shape Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt. Ltd. iii. M/s. Ziauddin Construction Company Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steel Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. Urban Properties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T Properties Pvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Mass Comparator Mas Metrology Division Calibration Working CCE 6 Sartorius Germany 17 NESCOM, Islamabad. KRL, Rawalpindi. ESBI, Abdul Hakim, POL Ltd. Pindighiab. SGS Pakistan Pvt(Ltd) PCS1R Labs, Lahore. Central 1TD Lab, Chaklala. PAEC , KNFC (Y-Lab ) Minawali. NDC, Islamabad. Green Valley Store, Islamabad. Pakistan Oil fields Ltd, Pindigaib. Kuisum Internal Hospital, IBD. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. ARF ,PAC , Kamra Attock. Scientific & Engg. Services, IBD. Suparco Karachi. Islamabad Scales and calibration IBD PAEC, Islamabad. DESTO Chattar Islamabad. Attock Refinery Ltd Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Loss Angeles Machine Laboratory Testing Extension Services (LTES) This machine is used to determine resistance to degradation of small sized coarse aggregate by abrasion and impact. Functional Repeatedly used as per demand of different clients, quality test of building material. Approximate 05 times is used in a month as per the number of job. i. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) ii. M/s. Usmani Pvt. Ltd. iii. M/s. Ziauddin Construction Company Ltd. iv. M/s. Faizan steel Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. Urban Properties Pvt. Ltd. vi.M/s. A.T Properties Pvt. Ltd. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Mass Comparator Mas Metrology Division Calibration Working CC 111 Sartorius Germany 10 NESCOM, Islamabad. KRL, Rawalpindi. ESBI, Abdul Hakim, POL Ltd. Pindighiab. SGS Pakistan Pvt(Ltd) PCS1R Labs, Lahore. Central 1TD Lab, Chaklala. PAEC , KNFC (Y-Lab ) Minawali. NDC, Islamabad. Green Valley Store, Islamabad. Pakistan Oil fields Ltd, Pindigaib. Kuisum Internal Hospital, IBD. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. ARF ,PAC , Kamra Attock. Scientific & Engg. Services, IBD. Suparco Karachi. Islamabad Scales and calibration IBD PAEC, Islamabad. DESTO Chattar Islamabad. Attock Refinery Ltd Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A MILL DISK CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL SECTION FOR GRINDING ANDCRUSHING OF MATERIAL Functional These equipments used in weighing,drying and crushing of materials usedduring R&D activities 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Mass Comparator Mas Metrology Division Calibration Under repair/ maintenance CC 10000U-L Sartorius Germany NESCOM, Islamabad. KRL, Rawalpindi. ESBI, Abdul Hakim, POL Ltd. Pindighiab. SGS Pakistan Pvt(Ltd) PCS1R Labs, Lahore. Central 1TD Lab, Chaklala. PAEC , KNFC (Y-Lab ) Minawali. NDC, Islamabad. Green Valley Store, Islamabad. Pakistan Oil fields Ltd, Pindigaib. Kuisum Internal Hospital, IBD. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. ARF ,PAC , Kamra Attock. Scientific & Engg. Services, IBD. Suparco Karachi. Islamabad Scales and calibration IBD PAEC, Islamabad. DESTO Chattar Islamabad. Attock Refinery Ltd Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Mass Comparator Mas Metrology Division Calibration Under repair/ maintenance CC50001S-L Sartorius German NESCOM, Islamabad. KRL, Rawalpindi. ESBI, Abdul Hakim, POL Ltd. Pindighiab. SGS Pakistan Pvt(Ltd) PCS1R Labs, Lahore. Central 1TD Lab, Chaklala. PAEC , KNFC (Y-Lab ) Minawali. NDC, Islamabad. Green Valley Store, Islamabad. Pakistan Oil fields Ltd, Pindigaib. Kuisum Internal Hospital, IBD. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. ARF ,PAC , Kamra Attock. Scientific & Engg. Services, IBD. Suparco Karachi. Islamabad Scales and calibration IBD PAEC, Islamabad. DESTO Chattar Islamabad. Attock Refinery Ltd Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A ELECTRIC OVEN SMALL CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL SECTION TO HEAT UP DIFFERENTEXPERIMENTAL SAMPLES Functional These equipments used in weighing,drying and crushing of materials usedduring R&D activities 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Mass Comparator Mas Metrology Division Calibration Functional AX1006 Metier Toledo 08 NESCOM, Islamabad. KRL, Rawalpindi. ESBI, Abdul Hakim, POL Ltd. Pindighiab. SGS Pakistan Pvt(Ltd) PCS1R Labs, Lahore. Central 1TD Lab, Chaklala. PAEC , KNFC (Y-Lab ) Minawali. NDC, Islamabad. Green Valley Store, Islamabad. Pakistan Oil fields Ltd, Pindigaib. Kuisum Internal Hospital, IBD. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. ARF ,PAC , Kamra Attock. Scientific & Engg. Services, IBD. Suparco Karachi. Islamabad Scales and calibration IBD PAEC, Islamabad. DESTO Chattar Islamabad. Attock Refinery Ltd Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A BALANCE CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL SECTION FOR MEASURING OFWEIGHT Functional These equipments used in weighing,drying and crushing of materials usedduring R&D activitie 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A ELECTRIC BALANCE CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL SECTION FOR ACCURATEMEASUREMENT OFSAMPLES Functional These equipments used in weighing,drying and crushing of materials used during R&D activities 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Analytical Balance Comparator Mas Metrology Division Working Sartorius Germany 05 PMEL,MRF,PACB, Kamra , Attock. Vision Pharmaceutical, Islamabad. Shaigan Pharma (PVT) Ltd. Rawalpindi. Cherat Cement Company Ltd.KPK. Soil & Water Testing Laboratory, RWP. AFP RWP, MT Labs (X) , POFs Wah Cantt. Amson Pharma (Pvt) Ltd, Islamabad. Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad. CNPGN , Minawali Calibration Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A VIBRATOR RABLE FOR SHEET CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL SECTION FOR VIBRATION OFCONCRETE SAMPLES Functional These equipments used during manholecover fabrication for the followingclient: 1. WASA FDA 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A WELDING PLANT CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL SECTION TO WELD DIFFERENTSTEEL MATERIALS Functional These equipments used during manholecover fabrication for the following client: 1. WASA FDA 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A NPK 107 Prototype 1kg kgmas Mas Metrology Division Calibration Working BIPM, France National Prototype kilogram PMEL,MRF,PACB, Kamra , Attock. Vision Pharmaceutical, Islamabad. Shaigan Pharma (PVT) Ltd. Rawalpindi. Cherat Cement Company Ltd.KPK. Soil & Water Testing Laboratory, RWP. AFP RWP, MT Labs (X) , POFs Wah Cantt. Amson Pharma (Pvt) Ltd, Islamabad. Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad. CNPGN , Minawali 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A CANAL LINING MACHINE CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL SECTION FOR CASTING OF CANALLINING UNITS 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A ASTM grooving tool Determination of liquid limit of soil Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Casa Grande grooving tool Determination ofliquid limit of soil. Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Moisture content tin Determination ofliquid limit of soil. Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 10 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Wash bottle 500 ml Determination ofliquid limit of soil. Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 4 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Set of masses E1 Comparator Mas Metrology Division Calibration Functional DKD Germany Used for in house calibration as reference PMEL,MRF,PACB, Kamra , Attock. Vision Pharmaceutical, Islamabad. Shaigan Pharma (PVT) Ltd. Rawalpindi. Cherat Cement Company Ltd.KPK. Soil & Water Testing Laboratory, RWP. AFP RWP, MT Labs (X) , POFs Wah Cantt. Amson Pharma (Pvt) Ltd, Islamabad. Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad. CNPGN , Minawali 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Mixing dish Determination ofliquid limit of soil. Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 2 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Set of masses E2 Mas Metrology Division Calibration Functional Belguim 70% use for Calibration PMEL,MRF,PACB, Kamra , Attock. Vision Pharmaceutical, Islamabad. Shaigan Pharma (PVT) Ltd. Rawalpindi. Cherat Cement Company Ltd.KPK. Soil & Water Testing Laboratory, RWP. AFP RWP, MT Labs (X) , POFs Wah Cantt. Amson Pharma (Pvt) Ltd, Islamabad. Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad. CNPGN , Minawali 01 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Bowls Determination ofliquid limit of soil Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 2 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Spatula Determination ofliquid limit of soil Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 2 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Set of masses FI (lmg t o 20 k g) Comparator Mas Metrology Division Calibration Functional Pakistan 20% use for calibration of Masses 20% use for calibration of Masses 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Set of masses F2 . (1 mg to 20 kg) Comparator Mas Metrology Division Calibration Functional France 10 % use for calibration of Masses PMEL,MRF,PACB, Kamra , Attock. Vision Pharmaceutical, Islamabad. Shaigan Pharma (PVT) Ltd. Rawalpindi. Cherat Cement Company Ltd.KPK. Soil & Water Testing Laboratory, RWP. AFP RWP, MT Labs (X) , POFs Wah Cantt. Amson Pharma (Pvt) Ltd, Islamabad. Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad. CNPGN , Minawali 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Sieve No.40 Determination ofliquid limit of soil. Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Set of masses E2 (1 mg to 5 kg) Comparator Mas Metrology Division Onsite Calibration Functional NPL India 100 % (2-3 on site calibration carried out in a month) PMEL,MRF,PACB, Kamra , Attock. Vision Pharmaceutical, Islamabad. Shaigan Pharma (PVT) Ltd. Rawalpindi. Cherat Cement Company Ltd.KPK. Soil & Water Testing Laboratory, RWP. AFP RWP, MT Labs (X) , POFs Wah Cantt. Amson Pharma (Pvt) Ltd, Islamabad. Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad. CNPGN , Minawali 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Washing pan Determination ofliquid limit of soil Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s HabibScientificCompany Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 4 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Ground Glass plate Determination ofplastic limit ofsoils Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s LabscoEnterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Spatula Determination ofplastic limit ofsoils Functional Locally manufactured by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Mixing Dish Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s LabscoEnterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Mixing Dish Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s LabscoEnterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Glass Cylinder Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s LabscoEnterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Moisture Cans Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s LabscoEnterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 6 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Evaporating dish 4 dia Determination ofshrinkage limitof soil Functional Locallymanufacturedby M/s Skim Enterprises Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Shrinkage Dish Determination of shrinkage limit of soil Functional Locally manufactured by M/s Skim Enterprises Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Graduated Cylinder (25ml) Determination of shrinkage limit of soil Functional Locally manufactured by M/s Skim Enterprises Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Shrinkage prong plate Determination of shrinkage limit of soil Functional Locally manufactured by M/s Skim Enterprises Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Glass Cylinder Determination of shrinkage limit of soil Functional Locally manufactured by M/s Skim Enterprises Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Stirring apparatus Determination of shrinkage limit of soil Functional Locally manufactured by M/s Skim Enterprises Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Hydrometer jar 1000 ml (6 pieces) Particle sizeanalysis of soils (Hydrometer method) Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 6 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Electronic DC Voltage. Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sectorand maintaining the traceability of Electrical Equipment Working 731-B, Fluke, USA 1.018,V, 10V Twice e in a Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital Multi-meter Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Working Fluke 75, 000 Vac/dc 10 Aac/dc, 10 MQ Fluke 75, 000 Vac/dc 10 Aac/dc, 10 MQ National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Soil hydrometer 152 H Particle size analysis of soils (Hydrometer method) Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Rubber bung Particle size analysis of soils (Hydrometer method) Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Glass thermometer Particle size analysis of soils (Hydrometer method) Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Constant temperature water bath Particle size analysis of soils (Hydrometer method) Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Beaker 250 ml. Particle size analysis of soils (Hydrometer method) Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Dispersing agent (Sodium hexametaphosphate 1000 g) Particle size analysis of soils (Hydrometer method) Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Stop watch Particle size analysis of soils (Hydrometer method) Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Bottle Plastic Density of soil in place by the sand cone method. And Determination of soil moisture on site Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Speedy moisture Density of soil in place by the sand cone method. And Determination of soil moisture on site Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Chisels Density of soil in place by the sand cone method. And Determination of soil moisture on site Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 2 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Tray of G I sheet Density of soil in place by the sand cone method. And Determination of soil moisture on site Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 2 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Thermometer readable to .1 C Determination of Specific Gravity of Soil Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Bottles of Capacity 25 ml Determination of Specific Gravity of Soil Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 3 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Bottles of Capacity 50 ml Determination of Specific Gravity of Soil Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 3 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Bottles of Capacity 100 ml Determination of Specific Gravity of Soil Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 3 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A No. 4 Sieve Determination of Specific Gravity of Soil Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Dry oven Used in different test Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Digital balance Used in different test Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Filed Scale balance Used in different test Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Hammer Used in different test Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Hard wire brush Used in different test Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Soft wire brus Used in different test Functional Locally manufactured by by M/s Labsco Enterprise Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A A Set of 4-Terminal Standard Resistor (0.0001 Qto lOkQ) Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining the traceability of Electrical EquipmentProviding test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining the traceability of Electrical Equipment Working WLN-10, H&B 0.0001Q to 10 kQ 10 Thrice in a Month (Approximately) 10 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital Multimeter Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Working 34401-Agilent, USA 1000 Vac/dc. 10 Aac/dc 100 MQ 10/Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrometer Water Testing Laboratory It is a Solar S-4Series model, usedfor water testing Functional It is used as and when required basis. Not regularly. In a month , we can use twice time Water Bottlers/ mineral watermanufacturers Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Complete Microbiological test setup Water Testing Laboratory Functional It is used as and when required basis. Not regularly. In a month , we can use twice time Water Bottlers/ mineral water manufacturers 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Portable water testing Kit Water Testing Laboratory Functional It is used as and when required basis. Not regularly. In a month , we can use twice time Water Bottlers/ mineral water manufacturers 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital Nano Volt / pQ Mete Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional 34420-Agilent, USA 100 V DC, 1 MQ Thrice in a Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Portable water meter Water Testing Laboratory Functional It is used as and when required basis. Not regularly. In a month , we can use twice time Water Bottlers/ mineral water manufacturers 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Pellet Mill Light Weight Aggregate Plant (Pilot Plant) It is a semiautomatic plantequipment used formaking light weightaggregate Functional These equipment have been procured for production of light weight aggregate, These equipments could be used on BOT system in joint collaboration with prospective stake holder. Private client under public-privatepartnership program. We are providingtraining services t the students ofdifferent engineering universities underinternship program regularly. At thisstage there is only ne major client i.eM/s Envicrete (Pvt.) Ltd 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Autoclave Light Weight Aggregate Plant (Pilot Plant) R&D equipment Functional These equipment have been procured for production of light weight aggregate, These equipments could be used on BOT system in joint collaboration with prospective stake holder. Private client under public-private partnership program. We are providing training services t the students of different engineering universities under internship program regularly. At this stage there is only ne major client i.e M/s Envicrete (Pvt.) Ltd 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A A Set of 2-Terminal Standard Resistor O.lQtolOOMQ Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional CIC, England Thrice in a Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 9 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Rectangular Mechanical Sieve Shaker Light Weight Aggregate Plant (Pilot Plant) R&D equipment Functional These equipment have been procured for production of light weight aggregate, These equipments could be used on BOT system in joint collaboration with prospective stake holder. Private client under public-private partnership program. We are providing training services t the students of different engineering universities under internship program regularly. At this stage there is only ne major client i.e M/s Envicrete (Pvt.) Ltd 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Electric Muffle Furnace Light Weight Aggregate Plant (Pilot Plant) R&D equipment Functional These equipment have been procured for production of light weight aggregate, These equipments could be used on BOT system in joint collaboration with prospective stake holder. Private client under public-private partnership program. We are providing training services t the students of different engineering universities under internship program regularly. At this stage there is only ne major client i.e M/s Envicrete (Pvt.) Ltd 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Traktor with shovel Light Weight Aggregate Plant (Pilot Plant) It is a part of pilotplant Functional Randomly used for Research testing. In the last month a set of 03 test were done for testing the soil from council. Private client under public-private partnership program. We are providing training services t the students of different engineering universities under internship program regularly. At this stage there is only ne major client i.e M/s Envicrete (Pvt.) Ltd 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Muffle Furnace Chemical Testing Laboratory Used regularly Functional Used regularly Cement industry 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Universal Calibration System Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Working System 9100-Wavetek, USA 10/Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 1 Director General 051-9265173 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Analytical balance Chemical Testing Laboratory Used regularly Functional Used regularly Cement industry 1 Chairman 021-82577235 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Lab. Oven Chemical Testing Laboratory Used regularly Functional Used regularly Cement industry 1 Chairman 021-82577235 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A A Set of Standard Air Capacitor 0.1 nF to lOpF Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional 1403-K, GR, USA O.lQto 1MQ Twice in a Month (Approximately) . National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 5 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A A Set of Standard Self Inductor Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining the traceability of Electrical Equipment Functional RS-102, ANDO, Japan 100 pH to 1000 mH Twice in a Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 6 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A AC/DC Power Supply and load Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining the traceability of Electrical Equipment Functional SLH300-18-1800M, USA Once in a Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 1 Director General 051-9265173 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Name of Equipment Name of Lab / Department / Section Function / Purpose Status of Equipment Operational / Non-Operational Make / Model / Specification Approximate Utilization in a Month as per the Number of Jobs Name of Companies / Clients Whom Services Provided in a Year Qty Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Analytical Balance (OHAUS) Chemical Laboratory, D159 For weighing Reagents, Chemicals and Samples. Operational OHAUS Daily use Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Analytical Balance (Sartorious) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For weighing. Operational Sartorious Daily use Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Top Loading Balance (Denwer) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For weighing. Operational Denwer Daily use Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Spectrophotometer (CECIL) (Pre programmed for water analysis) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Water Analysis. Operational CECIL (Pre programmed for water analysis) 20 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A UV-Vis Double Beam Spectro Photometer (PG Instruments) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Spectro-chemical analysis. Operational PG Instruments 20 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Box Furnace (Nobertherm) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For analysis of sample. Operational Nobertherm 30-40 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Box Furnace (Carbolite) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For analysis of sample. Operational Carbolite 50-60 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Laboratory Oven (Fishedr Scientific) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For drying sample. Operational Fishedr Scientific 50-60 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Flame Photometer (Jenway) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For determination of Sodium and Potassium in solution. Operational Jenway 20 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A TDS/Conductivity Meter (Jenway) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For determination of TDS of solution. Operational Jenway 20-25 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A pH Meter (Jenway and (Adwa) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For pH determination. Operational Jenway and Adwa 30-50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Water Distillation Apparatus (Germany) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For preparation of distilled water. Operational Germany Daily use Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Tintometer (Lovibond) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Colour composition. Operational Lovibond 25-30 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Moisture Meter (ADAM) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For determination of moisture. Operational Adma 40-50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Polarimeter (ATAGO) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Sugar analysis. Non-Operational Atago --- Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Refractometer (ATAGO) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Refractometry & Brix determination. Operational Atago 25-30 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Refrigerator (Lec) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Lab. use. Operational LEC 20-25 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Flash Point Apparatus (Petro est) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For determination of flash point of oils. Non-Operational Petro Test 0-2 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Penetrometer (Petro Test) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For determination Penetration of Petroleum products. Operational Petro Test 25-30 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Water Bath (GFL) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For digestion and sample preparation. Operational GFL 40-50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hot Plate Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For sample digestion and preparation. Operational - - - - 40-50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Centrifuge (Martin Christ). Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For sample preparation. Non-Operational Martin Christ - - - Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electrical Analyzer (Electro Plating) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Copper estimation. Operational Electro Plating 2 - 3 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Distillation Apparatus (Kotlerman) Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore General Lab. use Operational Kotlerman - - - Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A XRF Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Metal analysis Non-Operational/ out of order - - - - - - - - - 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A ICP Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Metal analysis Non-Operational/ out of order Lee Man - - - - - - 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Emission Spectrophotometer Spectro Lab. Chemical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Metal analysis Non-Operational/ out of order Spectro M5 - - - - - - 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Incubator 20 - 100 oC. Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Microbiological testing of food items. Operational China 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 3 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Autoclave front and up open (small size) Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Microbiological testing of food items. Operational Sargo Japan 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Laminar Flow Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Microbiological testing of food items. Operational Local 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Oven (Old) Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Microbiological testing of food items. Operational China 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Water Bath Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Microbiological testing of food items. Operational China 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Microscope Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Microbiological testing of food items. Operational China 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Colony Counter Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Microbiological testing of food items. Operational USA 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Centrifuge Machine Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Microbiological testing of food items. Operational China 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Fridge (Small size) Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For sample preservation. Operational NA 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Weight Balance Machine Microbiology Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore weight of food items. Operational China/OHAUS 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment (North), PSQCA 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Dynamic Balancing Machine Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Banalcing of Rotors / Fans. Operational Avery No.7207 50 - 60 Sugar industries, Shahkot industrial area. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Dynamic Balancing Machine Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Banalcing of Rotors Operational Avery No.7209 30 - 45 Ashraf Electric, Rustam Towel. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Universal Tensile Machine Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Strength of steel items. Operational Avery, Capacity 50 Ton. 80 Bend NESPAK, GDA, SNGPL, Development Projects 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Tensile Testing Machine Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Strength of steel items. Operational Avery, Capacity 0 - 2500 Lbs. 35 Steel Wire WASA, NESPAK 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Computerized Tensile Testing Machine. Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Strength of steel items. Operational Capacity 300 KN, USA. 30 NESPAK, GDA, SNGPL, Development Projects 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Rockwell Hardness Machine Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Hardness test Operational Avery B & C Scale. 30 Directorate of Technical Services Centre, PSQCA, Metro, WASA, Wapda 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Charpy Impact Testing Machine Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Testing of Steel strength Operational Avery 0 - 120, 0 - 220 ft. lb. 14 Directorate of Technical Services Centre, PSQCA, Metro, WASA, Wapda 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Impact Testing Machine Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Impact Test. Operational Avery 0 - 120 ft. lb. 12 NESPAK, GDA, SNGPL, Development Projects 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Dead Weight Tester Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Pressure gauges. Operational England 0 - 4000 PSI 10 Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Micrometers Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Thickness Operational England (0 - 25mm, 0 - 1") 50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, SNG, Motorway 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Varnier Caliper Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Dia thickness Operational England (0 - 6", 0 - 160mm) 50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, SNG, Motorway 3 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Proving Ring Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Calibration Operational England capacity 600 KN 2 Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Durometer Mechanical-1, Balancing Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Hardness test Operational U.S.A 15 NESPAK 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Universal Testing Machine Mechanical-2 Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Tensile testing Operational Schenck Capacity 1000 K.N. 25 - 40 Govt. Projcts, Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Balancing Machine CAB-690-H Mechanical-2 Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Balancing Operational Schenck 10 - 15 Sugar industries, Private manufacturers 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Crane Hand Operated. Mechanical-2 Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Carriage Operational Pakistan 10 - 15 Sugar industries, Private manufacturers 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Welding Plant. Mechanical-2 Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Welding Operational Local - - - - Sugar industries, Private manufacturers 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Weigh Balance Physical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Electrical testing. Operational Cap. 100kg./220 Lb. 30 For general Lab. use 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Oven Physical / Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For conducting heating test. Operational Cap. 0 - 100oC. 10 For general Lab. use 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Oven Physical / Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For conducting heating test. Operational Cap. 0 - 200oC. 25 For general Lab. use 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Oven Physical / Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For conducting heating test. Operational Cap. 0 - 250oC. (Air Circulated) 25 For general Lab. use 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Watts Meter AC/DC Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For electrical testing. Operational Cap. 0 - 150 10 Cable industry 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Resistance Box Veestone Bridge Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore To measure DC resistance. Non-Operational - - - - - - - - - 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A High Voltage Tester. 0 - 5 KV 0 - 40 KV Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For High Voltage Test Operational Canada 10 Cable industry 1 each Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Resistance Box Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore To measure DC resistance. Operational 200 Ohms. 10 Cable industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Direct Reading Anemometer Multi range. Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore To measure Air vilocity. Operational 0 - 1000 Cubic M, England 10 GFC, United, Sonex etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Battery Charger: 1. For One Battery 2. For Four Batteries Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Charging Battery sample Operational Local 5 DAEWOO, VOLTA, OSAKA, AGS etc. 1 each Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Transformer Oil Tester Electrical Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Dy-Electric Strength. Non-Operational/ out of order 0 - 40 KVA. - - - - - - 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pressure Testing Equipment, Cap. 100 Bar. UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Hydraulic Pressure Test. Operational Make: SCITEQ Hammel Denmark 60 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Thermotank, Cap. -5oC +80oC UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Control Water temp. Operational Make: SCITEQ Hammel Denmark 2 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Melt Flow Indexer, Cap. 300oC. Make: TMI New York. UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Melt flow rate of HDPE Pipes. Operational Make: TMI New York. 50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Balance, Cap. 12 kg. UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Weighing. Operational Make: KERN Japan. 80 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Balance, Cap. 200g. UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Weighing specific gravity. Operational Make: Mettler England. 80 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electronic Digital Caliper, Cap. 0 - 1000mm. UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Measurements. Operational Make: Reobuck Ind. 20 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Fracture Toughness Testing Apparatus UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore UPVC Pipe test. Operational Local made 50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Impact Test Apparatus UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Impact test of UPVC Pipes and others. Operational Local made 50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hydraulic Testing Machine UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Hydrostatic pressure test. Operational Cap. 70 Bar Local made 10 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Opacity Test Apparatus UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Opacity test of UPVC Pipes. Operational Local made 50 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Vernier Calliper UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Measurements. Operational 0 - 300mm Mitutoyo, Japan 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Micrometer UPVC Pipe Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Measurements. Operational 0 - 25mm Mitutoyo, Japan 100 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, WASA, LDA, PHE, NESPAK, Private sector 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Oven Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore General testing Operational 0 - 200 - - - - For general Lab. use 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Water Curing Tank Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore General testing Operational Local 2 - 3 For general Lab. use 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Los Angels Machine Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Stone Test Operational Engineering Lab. Equipment ELE N/A. Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Sieve Shaker Universal Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational England 10 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A EFL Sieve Shaker Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational England 5 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Ridgens Flow Meter Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational England N/A. Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pipe Crushing Machine for R.C.C. Pipe Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational - - - - 18 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Le Chatelier Water Bath Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational Engineering Lab. Equipment ELE 10 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Jolting Table Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational England made N/A. Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Automatic / Manual Motor Mixer 5 L cap. Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational Engineering Lab. Equipment ELE 10 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Bricks Cutter Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational Italy 5 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Vibrator for Mortar Cubes Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational Avery England N/A. Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Balance Manual (Avery) Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational Avery 15 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Weighing Box with 1100 grams Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational England 10 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Vicat Apparatus (with accessories) Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational England 14 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Stop Clock Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational England 8 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Blaines Apparatus Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational Italy 8 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Le Chatelier Apparatus Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational England 4 to 8 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Molds 70.1 x 70.1 mm Cement / Building Material Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Cement Operational Local 18 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NESPAK, Cement Ind., Private. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Breaking Strength Machine 1200 Lbs. Textile Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Breaking Strehgth Operational Good Brand, England 15 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, Punjab Food Deptt., Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Breaking Strength Machine 1500 Lbs. Textile Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Breaking Strehgth Operational Good Brand, England 15 - 30 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, Punjab Food Deptt., Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pressure Head Tester 150 Cm. Textile Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Pressure Head Operational Shirley 5 - 10 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, Punjab Food Deptt., Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Single Yarn Twist Tester. Textile Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore To count TPN Operational Good Brand, England 1 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, Punjab Food Deptt., Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Double Yarn Twist Tester. Textile Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore To count TPN Operational Good Brand, England 1 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, Punjab Food Deptt., Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Oven 0 - 300oC. Textile Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Ageing and Drying the Sample. Operational - - - - 3 - 10 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, Punjab Food Deptt., Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Wrap Reel. Textile Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore To prepare the lea sample. Operational Good Brand, England NIL Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, Punjab Food Deptt., Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Brusting Strength Tester 100 KPS Textile Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore Testing of cloth. Operational England 15 - 30 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, Punjab Food Deptt., Private 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Infrared K-Type Thermometer Gas Home Appliances Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For measurmenet Operational Range -32oC to 1370oC, Model # ST-8832. 10 - 16 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NASGAS, Canon etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Torque Wrench Gas Home Appliances Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For load test Operational 01 - 150 ft./Lbs. 10 - 16 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NASGAS, Canon etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Paint Test Equipment. Gas Home Appliances Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Galvinization Test Operational 2000 MK2 Eban 10 - 16 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NASGAS, Canon etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Gas Analyzer Gas Home Appliances Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For smooth test Operational Co/Hc, England 10 - 16 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NASGAS, Canon etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A U. Tensile Gas Home Appliances Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Water heating Operational Local 10 - 16 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NASGAS, Canon etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Gas Valve Tester. Gas Home Appliances Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore - - - - Operational Local 10 - 16 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NASGAS, Canon etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Gas Meter. Gas Home Appliances Laboratory, Quality Control Centre, Lahore For Gas Constant Operational China 10 - 16 Directorate of Conformity Assessment, North, PSQCA, NASGAS, Canon etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Optical Emission Spectrometer Spectro -Analysis Labs/Services Division, Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Testing of iron, copper, aluminum and zinc based samples in percentage Functional Bruker Q 8 Magellan Germany 4 days a week operation Public and Private Sectors including More than 400 SME across the country as well as Conformity Assessment Centres and Standardization wing of PSQCA 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Optical Emission Spectrometer OES Lab/Services Div. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Testing of metallic alloys Non Functional Baird Spectrovac 1000 __ --- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Varian AAS AA 240 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A With VGA 77 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hydride Generation Assembly Testing of metallic samples in ppm and testing of Arsenic, mercury in ppb levels. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore 1 2 days a week and depending on job frequency AAS Lab/Services Public and Private Sectors as well as Conformity Assessment Centres of PSQCA Functional Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Carbon Sulphur Apparatus Wet Chemistry Labs. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Determination of Carbon and Sulphur in steel, cast iron and coke coal samples Functional Strohlen C, S Appartus Once or twice a week depending on job frequency As above 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Spectrophotometer Wet Lab. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Colorimetric analysis of Fe, Si, P, Ni, Mo, Co in copper, iron and Aluminum alloys Functional Spectronic 20 Bausch & Lomb Once or twice a week depending on job frequency As above 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Muffel Furnace Wet Lab. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Ignition, fusion and ashing of high silicon sample Functional Vecstr MF 3 Depending on job frequency As above 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Furnace Wet Lab. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Sample fusion Non functional Gallenkemp -- -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Analytical Balance Wet Lab. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Weighing of samples Functional Sartorius Analytical Balance Depending on job frequency For sample preparation for AAS lab 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Top Loading Balance Wet Lab. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Weighing of samples Functional GF-300 Top loading balance Used in all wet lab job For wet chemistry testing jobs 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Experimental Rolling Mill TA - 315 Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For rolling of metal & Alloys In Operation STANAT USA 1-2 times for Research Work Punjab University 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Forging Hammer Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For forging of metal & alloys In Operation CFA 400 Romania 10 times per 179(avg) jobs Related to Internal Jobs 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Forging Press Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For die forging of metal & alloys Out of Service GAMEI S.A Spain 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Infrared Optical Pyrometer Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For temperature measurement of the sample in Reheating Furnaces In Operation RAYNGER II 1-2 times for Research Activities Related to Internal Jobs 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Gas Fired Reheating Furnace Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For reheating of metals & alloys upto 1400 oC used in forging In Operation Local Not in use because of unavailablity Sui Gas Connection 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Reheating Furnace Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For reheating of metals & alloys upto 1200 oC used in rolling Out of Service ANALIS 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Gas Fired Reheating Furnace Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For fired of metals & alloys upto 1400 oC used in forging In Operation Local Not in use because of unavailablity Sui Gas Connection 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A High Temp Electric Reheating Furnace Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For heating & stress releaving of metals & alloys upto 1500 oC used ri forging Out of Service POENIX Japan 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Reheating Furnace Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For reheating of metals & alloys upto 1300 oC Out of Service MNI Rg 63020 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A High Temp Electric Reheating Furnace Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For temp of metals & alloys upto 1360 oC Out of Service RX3-60-13 China 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Power Hacksaw Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For cutting of samples & maintenance job In Operation GREAT CAPTAN 10 times approx Related to Internal Jobs 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hydraulic Dynamometer Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For determination of torque & power of engines Out of Service D-230-1h SCHENCK Germany 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Automotive Gas Analyzer Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For analysis of exhaust gases Out of Service IMR 2800A 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Sound Level Meter Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore To record exterior sound level In Operation EXTECH 407730 10 times a month approx. Automotive Industry( Two & three Wheeler) 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Gas Analyzer Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For analysis of exhaust gases In Operation Kane UK 10 times a month approx. Automotive Industry( Two & three Wheeler) 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Smoke Tester Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For analysis of smoke In Operation NAW Brigon Germany 10 times a month approx. Automotive Industry( Two & three Wheeler) 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Light Meter Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For LUX measurement of Headlamp In Operation (SEW) 2330 LX Taiwan 10 times a month approx. Automotive Industry( Two & three Wheeler) 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Infrared Temperature Meter Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore To temperature measurement In Operation ? 10 times a month approx. Internal jobs 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Carbon Mono (CO) Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Analyze CO atmosphere/ during burning of fuel In Operation Gas Analyzer 317-3 UK 10 times a month approx. Automotive Industry( Two & three Wheeler) 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Torque Wrench Metal Working Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For determination of torque In Operation TTi 100 UK General Maintenance Jobs Internal jobs 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Charpy Pendulum Impact Tester Mechanical Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Impact test, PQR, WQT of metallic materials Functional Satec / SI-IK3 10 Public sector, such as PAEC, 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pakistan Railways, Wapda -Lesco, Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Conformity Assessment Centres Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Private Sector Enterprises namely Descon Engineering, DDFC etc. Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Rockwell Hardness Tester Mechanical Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Hardness test at HRC, HRA, HRB, HRF scales, Material Evaluation, PQR, WQT of metallic materials Functional Macromet 15 --do-- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Rockwell Superficial Hardness Tester Mechanical Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Hardness test at HR15 N, HR35 N, HR45 N, HR15 T, HR35 T, HR45 T scales, Material Evaluation, Failure Analysis, PQR, WQT of metallic materials Functional Wilson Wolpert / 500 MRA-S / 20 --do-- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Universal Hardness Testing Machine Mechanical Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Hardness test for Vickers, Rockwell, Brinell scales Material Evaluation, Failure Analysis, PQR, WQT of materials Functional Wolpert 20 --do-- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Universal Tensile Testing Machine Mechanical Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For tensile strength, Yield Strength (0.2% Off-set), Elongation, Reduction in Area of small size metallic material Functional Shimadzu / UA-1000KNI / 1000KN 100 Public sector, such as PAEC, SNGPL, 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pakistan Railways, Wapda -Lesco, Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Conformity Assessment Centres across the country Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Private Sector Enterprises namely Descon Engineering, DDFC, BBJ Pipes, Qadbros., Steel Bar Re-Rolling Mills, Structural Steel Manufacturers etc. Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Bar Bending Machine Mechanical Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For bending of steel bars Functional Gute / GW50C-1 20 Steel Bar Re-Rolling Mills, Conformity Assessment Centres 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hydraulic Bend Press Mechanical Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore Bend test upto 20mm thick/dia sample Functional --- --- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Upheld Metallurgical Microscope Metallography Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For initial Microstructural study, Quality assurance, Failure Analysis, of materials Functional Prior 20 Public sector, such as PAEC, SNGPL, 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Wapda -Lesco, Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Conformity Assessment Centres across the country Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Private Sector Enterprises namely petrochemical industry, fertilizer units, textile industry, Descon Engineering, DDFC, BBJ Pipes, Qadbros., etc. Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Inverted Metallurgical Microscope Metallography Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For final Microstructural Study of Metallic Materials, Quality assurance, Failure Analysis, of materials Functional Olympus / GX-71 / 50X to 1000X Magnification 25 -do- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Cut-off Machine, Hack saws, Mounting Machine, Grinder, Polisher Metallography Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For sample preparation for Metallography Lab. Functional 25 -do- 01 each Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Micro Hardness Tester Metallography Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For identification of different phase by hardness test in Microstructural, Failure Analysis, Research Work of materials Non-Functional MICROMET --- --- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Portable Grinding & Polishing Apparatus Metallography Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For surface preparation of material at site Functional In-Situ Metallography jobs Private Sector Enterprises petrochemical industry, fertilizer units, textile industry etc. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Portable Metallurgical Microscope PSM Metallography Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For final Microstructural study materials at site before taking replica. Functional Struers -do- -do- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Portable Hardness Tester Metallography Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For Hardness Test at site. Functional Time -do- -do- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Heat Treatment Furnace Heat Treatment Section / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For Annealing, Normalizing, Hardening of metallic materials 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Heat Treatment Furnace Heat Treatment Section / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For Annealing, Normalizing, Hardening of metallic materials Wild Barfield 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Heat Treatment Furnace Heat Treatment Section / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For Annealing, Normalizing, Hardening of metallic materials Carbolite 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Heat Treatment Furnace Heat Treatment Section / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For Tempering of metallic materials Budapest 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Coating Thickness Gauge Non-Destructive Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For coating thickness measurement on metallic materials Functional Time 15 Public sector, such as 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pakistan Railways, Wapda -Lesco, Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Conformity Assessment Centres Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Private Sector Enterprises namely Descon Engineering, DDFC, BBJ Pipes,Aluminum & copper Industry etc. Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Ultrasonic Flaw Detector Non-Destructive Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For flaw detection of metallic materials by utilization ultrasonic waves mechanism Non-Functional 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Magna-flex Crack Detector Non-Destructive Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For surface & blow surface discontinuities of metallic materials by utilization magnetizion mechanism Functional *For R and D as well as academic purpose 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Dye Penetration Inspection Kit Non-Destructive Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For surface discontinuities detection of metallic materials by utilization Penetrant Technique Functional *For R and D as well as academic purpose 01 Set Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Radiography Non-Destructive Testing Lab / Metallurgical Engineering Division. Technical Services Centre of PSQCA, Lahore For flaw detection of metallic materials by utilization X-ray technique. Non-Functional Philips 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Density Meter Oil&Fat /Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine density in Sugar & Oil Functional DMA-35 ANTON PAR/KYOTO DA-130N (NEW TYPE) Daily basis Sugar /Oil & Fat Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hot plate Oil & Fat lab/ Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi hot plates are generally used to heat Glasswares. Functional CORNING PC-620D/STD 1010.1Torreypine Daily basis Sugar /Oil & Fat Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Moisture Analyzer Food Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine moisture in any food item in Sugar & Oil Non Functional MAC 2003 Y ------ ----- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A KARLFISHER MOISTURE TITRATOR KF Oil&Fat Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi determination of water content functional KF 870 Weekly Oil & fat Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Potentio Meter Compact Titrator for Potentiometric acid base pH titration Functional 877 Trinto plus As per requirement Sugar Industries. 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Milk Analyzer Food Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi to determine Fat.protien and total solid in Milk Functional Mastwer Pro )14474) Daily basis Ffood Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Grinder Food Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Grinding and homogenisation of food stuff Non Functional GM 300 Retsch ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Centrifuge Food Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To separate liquid from solid Non Functional MPW-352 ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Muffle Furnance Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To dtermine total Ash in food item Functional L-1200 LABCON Daily basis Sugar Industries/Food Industries 3 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Vacuum Oven Food Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To dtermine moisture content Functional Hy 9820 Daily basis Ffood Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Oven Food Lab./Sugar, Quality Control Centre, Karachi To dtermine moisture content Functional XU 225/OFA 1108 Daily basis Oil & fat Industries/Sugar/ Food Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Vibrator Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Non Functional BS09 Germany As per requirement Cement Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Curing Tank Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Functional 55-C 19/C Germany As per requirement Cement Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A IRHD Hardness Meter Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Fuctional BAREISS BS-09 (7785) As per requirement Reubber Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Core cutting Machine Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Functional BST-182 As per requirement Bulidung Material Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hydrostatic pressure Equipment Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Functional ------ As per requirement UPVC Pipe Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Impact Tester Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Functional ------ As per requirement UPVC Pipe Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Fracture toughness Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Functional ------ As per requirement Building Material Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Mounting and Demounting Press Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Functional ------ As per requirement Bulidung Material Industry Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Opacity Tester Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Functional ------ As per requirement UPVC Pipe Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Air Compressor Building Material Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Related to Building material testing Functional As per requirement UPVC Pipe Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A pH Meter water & Beverages Lab/Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To dtermine pH Functional CP-401 Daily basis Water Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A TDS Meter water & Beverages Lab/Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To dtermine total dissolve solid in water Functional AD 410 Daily basis Water Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Flame Photo Meter water & Beverages Lab/Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine Na and K in water Functional PFP-7 JENWAY Daily basis Water Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Arsenic Kit water & Beverages Lab/Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine Arsenic in water ----- 08.10.2012 As per requirement Bottle Drinking Water Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pressure Guage water & Beverages Lab/Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Beverages testing Fuctonal Not mentioned As per requirement Beverages Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Photometer HACH water & Beverages Lab/Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Water testing Functional DR 2800 USA Daily basis Water Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Turbidity Meter water & Beverages Lab/Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine turbidity of water Functional 20008 USA Daily basis Water Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Coductivity Meter water & Beverages Lab/Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine conducdivity of water Functional CC-401 CC411 Daily basis Water/Sugar /Oil & Fat Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Water Bath Environment /Micro lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi It is used to incubate samples in water at a constant temperature over a long period of time Functional BW-20G Daily basis Ffood Industries 3 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Sonicator (Ultrasonic bath) Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Remove air bubbles from any solution Functional 1730 QTD Daily basis Sugar Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Cooling Water bath ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Refractometer Oil&Fat Lab/ Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine refractive index ,Brix in Sugar,sugar and vegetable oil Functional RX-5000 Daily basis Sugar Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Polarimeter Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine polarization in sugar Fuvctional RUDOLPH Auto Pol I Daily basis Sugar Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Spectrophotometer Sugar Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine absorption of sugar Fuctional UV 1700 Daily basis Sugar Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectro Photometer Spectro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Metal Analyzer Fuctional ICE 3000 As per requirement Water /Food/Non Food Indutries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Gas Chromatography Spectro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine volatile nonvolatile compound Non Fuctional Clarus 580 ------- #NAME? 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Rotary evaporator Spectro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Extraction or separation of any solution Functional F-105 As per requirement ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Eliza reader (Fax state) Spectro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi 1Aflatoxin,Melamine peteside testing Fuctional 4700 As per requirement Ffood Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A HPLC Spectro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Identify ,quantify and purify individual components in a mixture. Non Fuctional LC-10ATVP ----- ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Kjeldahi Distillation Assembly Environment lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine protien Non Functional SBS 2000 ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A High Voltage Tester Electrical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Electrical testing Fuctional HV-44 As per requirement Electrical item Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Megger Electrical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Electrical testing Fuctional 2804-INSEW As per requirement Electrical item Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Vernier Calliper Electrical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Electrical testing Fuctional 1112-200 As per requirement Electrical item Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Micro Meter Electrical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Electrical testing Fuctional 3109-25A As per requirement Electrical item Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Lux Meter Electrical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Electrical testing Fuctional TES-1334A As per requirement Electrical item Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Power Quality Analyser Electrical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Electrical testing Fuctional TES 3600 As per requirement Electrical item Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Contact Thermometer IR type Electrical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Electrical testing Fuctional TES 1327 As per requirement Electrical item Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Line voltage Stabilizer Electrical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Electrical testing Fuctional Stabimatic SF 1000C ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Calibrated Mass 1 gm,20 gm and 100gm Oil & fat lab/Micro/Food lab/BML Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To Check Accuracy of Balance Fuctional ------ ------ 3 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Commertial Blender Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Used for blending food and drinks Fuctional SEWARD 400 Circulator As per requirement Ffood Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Viscosity Bath Lubricant Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Determine viscosity of petrolium products Non Functional VB-40G ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Flash Point Lubricant Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Lubricant oil testing Functional CL5 As per requirement Lubricant Oil Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pour point Lubricant Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Lubricant oil testing Fuctional 490 /S As per requirement Lubricant Oil Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Gas Analyser Mechanical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Mechanical testing Fuctional 900403 As per requirement ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Vicker Hardness tester Mechanical Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Mechanical testing Non Functional TT-1000-MV-AAT(2014) ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Breaking Strenght Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine breaking strength in fibre Fuctional Good Brand Stalbridge As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Lea Strength Machine Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Textile testing Non Fuctional ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Tear Testing (Paper) Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Textile testing Non Fuctional ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Folding Endorsement (Paper) Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Textile testing Non Fuctional ------ ------ 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Crack Meter Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Rubbing of Fabric Fuctional S-83 type198B As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Twist Test Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Cpunting twist in fabric Fuctional ELCT Source As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Launder Meter Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine color fading after washing Fuctional M-2280017 AA618 B As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Fiber Analzser Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine composition of wool or cotton. Fuctional F-266-1 AMPS-20 As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Busting strength Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine paper bags busting Fuctional M229BAMPS-5 As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Marteudle Tester Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Textile testing Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electronic Crock Meter Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine color fading in Fabric Fuctional 198B S-1083212 As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Perspiration Meter Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine absorption of water in fabric Fuctional S-222 As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Brightness Test (paper) Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine brightness in paper Functional 53185868997 As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Fedometer Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine color fastness of fabric in sun light Fuctional SB X3000 E-R-H As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Wash Meter Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine color fading after washing Fuctional Top Load Washer suitable As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Air Permeability Appratus Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi To determine air pressure testing in Parachute. Fuctional FX-3300 As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Pick Counter Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Analysing number of threads Fuctional FX-3250 As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Universal Tensile Testing Textile Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Breaking strength Machine for textile. Fuctional Testometer 000981401 As per requirement Textile Industry 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Autclave Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Sterilization purpose Fuctional LAC-5080 S/NAPCO 8000 DSE Daily basis Water/Food Industries 4 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Incubator Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Incubation purpose Fuctional BD 400/ LMS 100W/BD-E2-240 Daily basis Water/Food Industries 5 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Colony Counter Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Counting bacterial colonies Fuctional CC-1 Daily basis Water/Food Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Lamina Flow Hood Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi laminar flow hood provides an aseptic work area Fuctional Nap Flow STD 6VIE/ESCO/SHC-4AI Daily basis Water/Food Industries 4 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Vortex Mixer Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi mix small vials of liquid Fuctional CORNING ILSE Daily basis Water/Food Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Stomacher Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Blender for Food Fuctional 400 Circulator SEWARD Daily basis Water/Food Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electric Motor Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Water Filteration Fuctional L100431 Sparmax Daily basis Water/Food Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Commertial Blender Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Blending purpose Fuctional WARING 8011 EG Daily basis Water/Food Industries 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Micscope Micro Lab. Quality Control Centre, Karachi Microbiological testing Fuctional B.I series MOTIC Daily basis Water/Food Industries 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Conductivity Meter, Germany Chemical /Water, Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Conductivity Operational 720 wtw, Germany 30 Samples collected by SDC (BDW,Oil and ghee and all other food and non-food itms 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Conductivity Meter, Germany Chemical /Water, Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Conductivity Operational 720 wtw, Germany -- -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Refractometer, Japan Chemical /Water, Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Refractive index,brix Operational RX 50000, Japan -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital pH, Germany Chemical /Water, Quality Control Centre, Peshawar pH of water and solution Operational 7110 wtw, Germany -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital pH, Germany Chemical /Water, Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Operational 7110 wtw, Germany -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Spectrophotometer, Australia Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar for trace elements Operational DB 20, Australia -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Flam Photometer, UK Chemical /water Quality Control Centre, Peshawar For Na & K etc Operational 410, UK 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Water & Oil Bath(Dig control Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar General Operational WNB 45, Germany 20 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Water & Oil Bath(Dig control Micro/water Quality Control Centre, Peshawar -- Operational WNB 45, Germany -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Drying Oven Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar drying Operational UNE 550, Germany 25 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Drying Oven Operational UNE 550, Germany 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Electronic Balance (Analytical) Chemical /micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar weighing Operational AUW 320, Japan 20 3 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Moisture Balance Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar moisture test Operational MOC 120 H, Japan 15 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Water Distillation Plant Micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar for distilled water preparation Operational 700700, 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hot Plate Chemical /micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Controlled heating solutions Operational REC VFL, UK 30 3 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Incubator Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Controlled environment (temp & humidity) Operational INE 600, Germany 30 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Incubator Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar -- Operational INE 600, Germeny -- 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Autoclave (for Sterilization) Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar sterilization Operational HVE 50, Japan 30 2 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Colony Counter Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar colony counting Operational SJP 4905000, Spain 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Filtration Assembly(with pump) Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar micro filtration Non-Operational MEI VACUU -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Micro Pipette Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar volume measurement Operational P2N Gilson, France 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Micro Pipette Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar -- Operational NCO P-10n, France 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Micro Pipette Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar -- Operational NCO P-10n, France 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Micro Pipette Micro test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar -- Operational NCO P-10n, France 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Tintometer Lovibond Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar measurement of color indexRrancidity Operational PFX 880, UK 40 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Polarimeter Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Measurement of fructose and optical activity Non-Operational ADB 410 -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Turbidity Meter Water Quality Control Centre, Peshawar turbidity of water Operational TURB 430, Germany 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Spectrophotometer (Water) Water Quality Control Centre, Peshawar chemical analysis of water & beverages Operational 6600 WTW, Germany 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Muffle Furnace Micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar For high temperature ignition/Ash formation Operational D 550 35 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Muffle Furnace Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar -- Out of order D 550 -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Auto Clave Micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar sterilization Operational HVA 85, Japan 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Calibrated Thermometer(06 Nos Chemical test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar temperature measurements Operational USA Daily 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Density/Specific Gravity meter Chemical test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Density/Specific Gravity measurements Operational DA 130-N, Japan 25 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Refrigerator Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar providing controlled low temperature Operational 12CHft Daily 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Fuming Chamber Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar For exhaust of harmful fumes and gases from lab Operational KD 1200 Daily 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Microscope Micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar microorganism analyser Operational SS 24, UK 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Vortex Mixer Micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Unform mixing of samples Operational QL 866, UK 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hot Plate Magnetic Stirrer Chemical/water Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Heating and stirring Operational MS300, UK 25 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Horizontal Flow Cabinet Micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Producing controlled microbiological environment Operational HS 1800, UK 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Melting Point (Semiautomatic) Chemical test Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Measurement of melting point Operational WRS-2, UK 25 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Thermo Hygrometer Recorder Micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Environment checking (temperature & humidit) 02 out of order - Daily 4 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Centrifuge Machine (Engle roler) Micro Quality Control Centre, Peshawar For seperating samples into layers Non-Operational K2015 R, UK -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Spectroquant water Quality Control Centre, Peshawar chemical analysis of water Out of order Germany -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Thermo Reactor water Quality Control Centre, Peshawar For BOD & COB in water Non-Operational 3,15 A, Germany -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Grinding Mills Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar to make samples fine Non-Operational - -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Hydraulic Press Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar For measuremnet of compactness Non-Operational 15tn -- 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Digital Hot Plate Water Quality Control Centre, Peshawar For controlled heating Operational Velp RC Itly 30 1 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Vaccum Pumps Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar For speeding up filtration process Operational -- 20 3 Director General 021-99206260 Pakistan Standards And Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) N/A Micrwave oven Chemical Quality Control Centre, Peshawar Heating Operational Samsung, Malaysia Daily 1 Director General 021-99206260 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A AC/DC Voltage Divider Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional DVT-150, HVI USA 150 kV Twice in a Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 02 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital multi meter Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional 3458-A, Agilent, USA- 1000 Vac/dc 3 A ac/dc 10/Month (Approximately) National Radio Tele Communication Corporation (NRTC) Haripur NWFP PEPCO Faisalabad HV&SC Labs Rawat Islamabad PEPCO Faisalabad PCSIR Labs Complex Lahore 509 Electronic Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC) Rawalpindi Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT) Rawalpindi Naval Precision Electronic Complex (NPEC) Karachi Pakistan International Air Lines Complex Karachi PIAC Karachi PCSIR Labs Complex Karachi Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science Technology (PINSTECH) Nilore Islamabad Kamra Avionics Radar . Factor (KARF) PAC Kamra Mirrage Rebuild Factory 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digit LCR Meter Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining the traceability of Electrical Equipment Working PM-6306, Fluke 0,1m2 to 200MO O.Olp to 31.8F 0.01 pH to 637 kH 10/Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Multifunction Calibrator Precision Power Amplifier Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining the traceability of Electrical Equipment Working 5720-A, 5725-A, Fluke 1020 Vac/dc 11 Aac/dc 100 MSI 10/Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A 8/2 Digit Reference Multimeter Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Working 8508-A/01-210, Fluke 1020 Vac/dc 20 Aac/dc 10/Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A 4-Cell DC Voltage Reference Standard Set of 04 cel Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Working 734-A/40-240, Fluke 1.018,V, 10V Once in a Month (Approximately Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Transformer Turns Ratio Test Set, Transformer Auditor Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional TX-21 Once in a Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Electrical Power Calibrator with 80A Option 160501- R/DBEX Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional 6105A/80A 0.008 VA to 18 kVA AC to 600 V, 3 channels DC 1 to 280 V 0.008 to 30 A, 3 channels AC/DC Once in a Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Three Phase Power Test Equipment, (Relay / Universal Test System) Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Working PRFJA-300 6 x 15A ( 80 VA) 4 x 300V ( 80 VA) Once in a Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Dielectric Insulation Oil Tester 200/99223010 Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Working DTA 100C Australia Test voltages up to 100 kV Once in a Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore PAK international Education System Priv^ate Limited Islamabad FAUJl Cement Company Limited Fateh Jang Prime Corporation Private Limited Lahore HMC-3, Rawalpindi M/S Rashid Constructions Private Limited Wah Cantt Rawalpindi Project Management Organization (PMO) Islamabad M/S TELENOR Pakistan Private Limited Islamabad National Development Complex (NDC) Islamabad M/S ESCORT Pakistan Private Limited, Lahore M/S Pak Electron Limited ( PEL ) Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Three Phase Network Analyzer / Tester TE-30 Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional Calmet TE-30, Poland Voltage range 0,05- 300V Current range 0,001 to 12(100)(1000)(30/30 Once in a Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore PAK international Education System Priv^ate Limited Islamabad FAUJl Cement Company Limited Fateh Jang Prime Corporation Private Limited Lahore HMC-3, Rawalpindi M/S Rashid Constructions Private Limited Wah Cantt Rawalpindi Project Management Organization (PMO) Islamabad M/S TELENOR Pakistan Private Limited Islamabad National Development Complex (NDC) Islamabad M/S ESCORT Pakistan Private Limited, Lahore M/S Pak Electron Limited ( PEL ) Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Three Phase Comparator Three Phase /Voltage Source Three Phase Reference Meter Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional Zeera Germany Com 5003 Zeera Germany MT- 551 Zeera Germany Mt- 3000 100...1500 Amp per phase 120...347 (L to N) 208...600 (L to L) Once in a Month (Approximately) Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore PAK international Education System Priv^ate Limited Islamabad FAUJl Cement Company Limited Fateh Jang Prime Corporation Private Limited Lahore HMC-3, Rawalpindi M/S Rashid Constructions Private Limited Wah Cantt Rawalpindi Project Management Organization (PMO) Islamabad M/S TELENOR Pakistan Private Limited Islamabad National Development Complex (NDC) Islamabad M/S ESCORT Pakistan Private Limited, Lahore M/S Pak Electron Limited ( PEL ) Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Three Phase Power Analyzer PA 2203A Electrical Metrology Division Providing test and calibration services to public and private sector and maintaining thetraceability of Electrical Equipment Functional Integra Vision, USA 2203A 1000 V/2000 V Peak 2 A / 6 A Peak Once in a Month (Approximately) PAK international Education System Priv^ate Limited Islamabad FAUJl Cement Company Limited Fateh Jang Prime Corporation Private Limited Lahore HMC-3, Rawalpindi M/S Rashid Constructions Private Limited Wah Cantt Rawalpindi Project Management Organization (PMO) Islamabad M/S TELENOR Pakistan Private Limited Islamabad National Development Complex (NDC) Islamabad M/S ESCORT Pakistan Private Limited, Lahore M/S Pak Electron Limited ( PEL ) Lahore Chashma Nuclear Power Plant (CNPP) Mianwali Institute of Electronics & Instrumentation (IE&I) Fort Area Chaklala Rawalpindi Abbott Laboratories Private Limited Karachi Kundian Chemical Plant- II, KCPW, PAEC, Joharabad Capita!Constructions Private Limited Islamabad National Centre for Destructive Tests (NCNDT) PAEC Islamabad Cali Test Laboratory Private Limited Lahore Cherat Cement Limited NWFP Iqbal Enterprises Private Limited Islamabad GM Tech Private Limited Islamabad Inspect Test Private Limited Lahore 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Universal Measuring Machine Dimension Metrology Division Calibration and Accesbility of images Functional LD. # DS-18 5 Cherat Cement Limited, Nowshera. National Development Complex. MRF PACB Kamra. Inspectest (Pvt) Ltd Lahore. PIA Flight Services, Islamabad International Airport. Pakistan Tobacco Company, Jheium. Heavy Mechanical Complex Taxila. Punjab Forensic Science Agency Lahore. PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Lahore. Chashma Nuclear Plant Generating Station (CNPGS). SUPARCO HQ, Karachi. United Technology Humak Kahuta Road, Islamabad. NTDC Rawat,. Attock Refining Ltd, Rawalpindi. Weight & Measures Sindh, Karachi. National Radio Telecommunication Corporation, KPK AED-PAF Base Faisal Karachi. Pakistan Tobacco Company, KPK. Indus precision Service, Karachi. PoFs, Wah Cantt. Azhar & Mazhar Associates, Rawalpindi. Fauji cement Company Ltd, Attock. . PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Karachi. SGS Pakistan (Private) Ltd, Karachi. . PMEL 509 Electronics Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Cantt. Scientific & Engineering Services Directorate NEW-L Islamabad.. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, Mianwali. Global Marketing Services, Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Working Standard Meter Electrical Metrology Division Calibration and Accesbility of images Functional LD. # DS-18 5-6 Cherat Cement Limited, Nowshera. National Development Complex. MRF PACB Kamra. Inspectest (Pvt) Ltd Lahore. PIA Flight Services, Islamabad International Airport. Pakistan Tobacco Company, Jheium. Heavy Mechanical Complex Taxila. Punjab Forensic Science Agency Lahore. PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Lahore. Chashma Nuclear Plant Generating Station (CNPGS). SUPARCO HQ, Karachi. United Technology Humak Kahuta Road, Islamabad. NTDC Rawat,. Attock Refining Ltd, Rawalpindi. Weight & Measures Sindh, Karachi. National Radio Telecommunication Corporation, KPK AED-PAF Base Faisal Karachi. Pakistan Tobacco Company, KPK. Indus precision Service, Karachi. PoFs, Wah Cantt. Azhar & Mazhar Associates, Rawalpindi. Fauji cement Company Ltd, Attock. . PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Karachi. SGS Pakistan (Private) Ltd, Karachi. . PMEL 509 Electronics Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Cantt. Scientific & Engineering Services Directorate NEW-L Islamabad.. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, Mianwali. Global Marketing Services, Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Set of Angie Gauge Dimension Metrology Division Functional Functional AGB-15 (accessory of DSUMM,) Cherat Cement Limited, Nowshera. National Development Complex. MRF PACB Kamra. Inspectest (Pvt) Ltd Lahore. PIA Flight Services, Islamabad International Airport. Pakistan Tobacco Company, Jheium. Heavy Mechanical Complex Taxila. Punjab Forensic Science Agency Lahore. PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Lahore. Chashma Nuclear Plant Generating Station (CNPGS). SUPARCO HQ, Karachi. United Technology Humak Kahuta Road, Islamabad. NTDC Rawat,. Attock Refining Ltd, Rawalpindi. Weight & Measures Sindh, Karachi. National Radio Telecommunication Corporation, KPK AED-PAF Base Faisal Karachi. Pakistan Tobacco Company, KPK. Indus precision Service, Karachi. PoFs, Wah Cantt. Azhar & Mazhar Associates, Rawalpindi. Fauji cement Company Ltd, Attock. . PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Karachi. SGS Pakistan (Private) Ltd, Karachi. . PMEL 509 Electronics Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Cantt. Scientific & Engineering Services Directorate NEW-L Islamabad.. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, Mianwali. Global Marketing Services, Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Gauge Block Comparator Dimension Metrology Division Calibration and Accesbility of images Functional Millitron 1240 Cherat Cement Limited, Nowshera. National Development Complex. MRF PACB Kamra. Inspectest (Pvt) Ltd Lahore. PIA Flight Services, Islamabad International Airport. Pakistan Tobacco Company, Jheium. Heavy Mechanical Complex Taxila. Punjab Forensic Science Agency Lahore. PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Lahore. Chashma Nuclear Plant Generating Station (CNPGS). SUPARCO HQ, Karachi. United Technology Humak Kahuta Road, Islamabad. NTDC Rawat,. Attock Refining Ltd, Rawalpindi. Weight & Measures Sindh, Karachi. National Radio Telecommunication Corporation, KPK AED-PAF Base Faisal Karachi. Pakistan Tobacco Company, KPK. Indus precision Service, Karachi. PoFs, Wah Cantt. Azhar & Mazhar Associates, Rawalpindi. Fauji cement Company Ltd, Attock. . PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Karachi. SGS Pakistan (Private) Ltd, Karachi. . PMEL 509 Electronics Base Workshop EME Gujranwala Cantt. Scientific & Engineering Services Directorate NEW-L Islamabad.. Aga Khan Foundation, Rawalpindi. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, Mianwali. Global Marketing Services, Rawalpindi. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Universal Measuring Machine Dimension Metrology Division For particle size test and analysis of samples Functional UMM2 20 guages blocks/feeler guage per month POF Materials Testing Labs, Wah Cantt. Analyzer 3000) R&D Calitest Laboratory, Lahore. International Tubular Services Ltd. Sector MO/3, 0 0 i Islamabad.Central Testing Laboratory, Bahria Town (Pvt) Ltd. Islamabad. Air Weapons Complex, PAF Wah Cantt. Cfl Techni Control Suit, Karachi ABBOTT Laboratories Pakistan Ltd. KHI. B i Millat Tractors Limited, Lahore. Q CL, Benson Pharmaceuticals, Islamabad, l*0 Astech Precision Engg. Islamabad. t-t-l Al-Noor Refractories Najam Shaheed Road, RWP. Crescent Textile Mills Limited, Faisalabad. Leather Research Centre, Karachi. NESPAK Pvt Ltd, Islamabad. . Victory Pipe Industries Pvt. Ltd, Islamabad. Locomotive works, Risalpur. Mehran University of Engineering & Technology Jamshoro, Sindh. Microwave Precision Instrument Industry Rawalpindi Dimensional Metrology Lab. POF Wah Cantt MIDJAC (Pvt) Ltd. Rawalpindi. FOAR Innovative Technologies, Islamabad. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Length Comparator Dimension Metrology Division Calibration and Accesbility of images Functional I.D. # DS-7 3-5 POF Materials Testing Labs, Wah Cantt. Analyzer 3000) R&D Calitest Laboratory, Lahore. International Tubular Services Ltd. Sector MO/3, 0 0 i Islamabad.Central Testing Laboratory, Bahria Town (Pvt) Ltd. Islamabad. Air Weapons Complex, PAF Wah Cantt. Cfl Techni Control Suit, Karachi ABBOTT Laboratories Pakistan Ltd. KHI. B i Millat Tractors Limited, Lahore. Q CL, Benson Pharmaceuticals, Islamabad, l*0 Astech Precision Engg. Islamabad. t-t-l Al-Noor Refractories Najam Shaheed Road, RWP. Crescent Textile Mills Limited, Faisalabad. Leather Research Centre, Karachi. NESPAK Pvt Ltd, Islamabad. . Victory Pipe Industries Pvt. Ltd, Islamabad. Locomotive works, Risalpur. Mehran University of Engineering & Technology Jamshoro, Sindh. Microwave Precision Instrument Industry Rawalpindi Dimensional Metrology Lab. POF Wah Cantt MIDJAC (Pvt) Ltd. Rawalpindi. FOAR Innovative Technologies, Islamabad. 1 Director General 051-9265173 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Shaking Incubator CDLE Ideal for studies requiring a continuous shaking motion with control temperature. Useful for solubility, mixing, bacterial suspension, also for the propagation of bacteria, mould, plant cells and other microbes. SI-1/17 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Magnetic Stirrer Hot Plate CDLE A Combination Of Hot Plate and Stirring System, Ideal for Heating and Stirring of Viscous/Semi-Viscous Liquids, Distillation, Evaporation and Digestion applications. Model No. (DMSHP-1/11) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Ozone Generator CDLE This unit is designed to treat air, vegetables, Fruit, meat and water only, at high ozone concentration levels PESONIC-01 1 Director General 042-99230697 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Double Image Comparator Dimension Metrology Division For particle test size/analysis of samples Working I.D. # DS-05 1 POF Materials Testing Labs, Wah Cantt. Analyzer 3000) R&D Calitest Laboratory, Lahore. International Tubular Services Ltd. Sector MO/3, 0 0 i Islamabad.Central Testing Laboratory, Bahria Town (Pvt) Ltd. Islamabad. Air Weapons Complex, PAF Wah Cantt. Cfl Techni Control Suit, Karachi ABBOTT Laboratories Pakistan Ltd. KHI. B i Millat Tractors Limited, Lahore. Q CL, Benson Pharmaceuticals, Islamabad, l*0 Astech Precision Engg. Islamabad. t-t-l Al-Noor Refractories Najam Shaheed Road, RWP. Crescent Textile Mills Limited, Faisalabad. Leather Research Centre, Karachi. NESPAK Pvt Ltd, Islamabad. . Victory Pipe Industries Pvt. Ltd, Islamabad. Locomotive works, Risalpur. Mehran University of Engineering & Technology Jamshoro, Sindh. Microwave Precision Instrument Industry Rawalpindi Dimensional Metrology Lab. POF Wah Cantt MIDJAC (Pvt) Ltd. Rawalpindi. FOAR Innovative Technologies, Islamabad. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Reference Standard meter Dimension Metrology Division For particle test size/analysis of samples Functional I.D. # DS-04 Reference Prototype POF Materials Testing Labs, Wah Cantt. Analyzer 3000) R&D Calitest Laboratory, Lahore. International Tubular Services Ltd. Sector MO/3, 0 0 i Islamabad.Central Testing Laboratory, Bahria Town (Pvt) Ltd. Islamabad. Air Weapons Complex, PAF Wah Cantt. Cfl Techni Control Suit, Karachi ABBOTT Laboratories Pakistan Ltd. KHI. B i Millat Tractors Limited, Lahore. Q CL, Benson Pharmaceuticals, Islamabad, l*0 Astech Precision Engg. Islamabad. t-t-l Al-Noor Refractories Najam Shaheed Road, RWP. Crescent Textile Mills Limited, Faisalabad. Leather Research Centre, Karachi. NESPAK Pvt Ltd, Islamabad. . Victory Pipe Industries Pvt. Ltd, Islamabad. Locomotive works, Risalpur. Mehran University of Engineering & Technology Jamshoro, Sindh. Microwave Precision Instrument Industry Rawalpindi Dimensional Metrology Lab. POF Wah Cantt MIDJAC (Pvt) Ltd. Rawalpindi. FOAR Innovative Technologies, Islamabad. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Particle Size Analyzer Dimension Metrology Division For particle test size/analysis of samples Functional Master Sizer 3000 As per need= used as part of R& D POF Materials Testing Labs, Wah Cantt. Analyzer 3000) R&D Calitest Laboratory, Lahore. International Tubular Services Ltd. Sector MO/3, 0 0 i Islamabad.Central Testing Laboratory, Bahria Town (Pvt) Ltd. Islamabad. Air Weapons Complex, PAF Wah Cantt. Cfl Techni Control Suit, Karachi ABBOTT Laboratories Pakistan Ltd. KHI. B i Millat Tractors Limited, Lahore. Q CL, Benson Pharmaceuticals, Islamabad, l*0 Astech Precision Engg. Islamabad. t-t-l Al-Noor Refractories Najam Shaheed Road, RWP. Crescent Textile Mills Limited, Faisalabad. Leather Research Centre, Karachi. NESPAK Pvt Ltd, Islamabad. . Victory Pipe Industries Pvt. Ltd, Islamabad. Locomotive works, Risalpur. Mehran University of Engineering & Technology Jamshoro, Sindh. Microwave Precision Instrument Industry Rawalpindi Dimensional Metrology Lab. POF Wah Cantt MIDJAC (Pvt) Ltd. Rawalpindi. FOAR Innovative Technologies, Islamabad. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Frequency Generator/Freq.Std. Time & Frequency Metrology Divisio Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model# SMF 100A Make: R7S Germany 15 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Frequency counter/ Freq.Std Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibration of equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model # 53152A Make: Keysight, USA 03 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital Tachometer Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model#DT 22B Make:Taiwan 3 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Frequency counter /Freq.Std Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model#53230A Make: Agilent 04 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal 04 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Signal Channel Power Meter/Sensors Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model # E4416A Make: Agilent 06 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A GPS based Rb Frequency Standard Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model#RF10F Make: Precision Test System Ltd.,England 18 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Frequency Generator/Sensors Frequency analyzer/ Freq.Std Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model FSW, Make:R&S Germany 09 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Frequency Counter/Attenuators Frequency Counter Freq.Std / Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model#5323QA Make: Agilent 02 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Oscilloscope Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model# RTO 1002, Make: R&S, Germany 01 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Function Generator/ . Freq.Std Time & Frequency Metrology Division Calibrationof equipment related to Time & Frequency Metrology Functional Model: 2203 . Make: Marconi,England 14 CNPGS Mianwali NRTC, Haripur IDC, Islamabad PCSIR LHR Naval Precision Electronics Complex Karachi CNPGS, Mianwali KRL, Rawalpindi. PTC, Akora Khattak PCSIR, Karachi SUPARCO PIA, Karachi PAEC, General Hospital, Islamabad Wapda, Rawat Shaigan Pharma Pvt Ltd Kundian Chemical Industries NPEC, Pakistan Navy, Karachi Aero Calibration Lab, AWC central registry, Hassanabdal Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital Weight Tester Pressure Metrology Division Calibration Functional i) UK/M2800/3S ii) USA/P-3124-3 iii) Lucas UK/8260 5 KRL, Rwp KCP-WCI, Juaharabad PINST, Islamabad > Shaigan Pharma, Rwp Nestle Pakistan Ltd SGS, Islamabad KCP- WCI, Juaharabad APF, PMEL, PAC Kamra NDC, Islamabad BF Bio Sciences CGGC-CMEC NJ PM Cherat Cement Company Ltd SGS, Pakistan Ltd Karachi PCSIR Lhr, Agha Khan Foundation, NDC, Islamabad POL Ltd, Rwp, CNPGS Pakistan Tobacco Company, PCSIR, Khi Rafhan Maize Product Ltd CGGC-CMEC NJ PM KCP, Jauharabad 03 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital Pressure Indicator (Reference Gauge) Pressure Metrology Division Calibration 02 Functional 02 Mai Functioning UK//DPI 104 /Druck i) 0-20 bar ii)0-2 bar iii)0-700 bar Reference Gauges KRL, Rwp KCP-WCI, Juaharabad PINST, Islamabad > Shaigan Pharma, Rwp Nestle Pakistan Ltd SGS, Islamabad KCP- WCI, Juaharabad APF, PMEL, PAC Kamra NDC, Islamabad BF Bio Sciences CGGC-CMEC NJ PM Cherat Cement Company Ltd SGS, Pakistan Ltd Karachi PCSIR Lhr, Agha Khan Foundation, NDC, Islamabad POL Ltd, Rwp, CNPGS Pakistan Tobacco Company, PCSIR, Khi Rafhan Maize Product Ltd CGGC-CMEC NJ PM KCP, Jauharabad 04 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital Pneumatic Calibrator Pressure Metrology Division Calibration Functional UK/Procurements 4 KRL, Rwp KCP-WCI, Juaharabad PINST, Islamabad > Shaigan Pharma, Rwp Nestle Pakistan Ltd SGS, Islamabad KCP- WCI, Juaharabad APF, PMEL, PAC Kamra NDC, Islamabad BF Bio Sciences CGGC-CMEC NJ PM Cherat Cement Company Ltd SGS, Pakistan Ltd Karachi PCSIR Lhr, Agha Khan Foundation, NDC, Islamabad POL Ltd, Rwp, CNPGS Pakistan Tobacco Company, PCSIR, Khi Rafhan Maize Product Ltd CGGC-CMEC NJ PM KCP, Jauharabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Precision Barometer Pressure Metrology Division Calibration Functional i) UK/Druck ii) USA/Fluke 01 KRL, Rwp KCP-WCI, Juaharabad PINST, Islamabad > Shaigan Pharma, Rwp Nestle Pakistan Ltd SGS, Islamabad KCP- WCI, Juaharabad APF, PMEL, PAC Kamra NDC, Islamabad BF Bio Sciences CGGC-CMEC NJ PM Cherat Cement Company Ltd SGS, Pakistan Ltd Karachi PCSIR Lhr, Agha Khan Foundation, NDC, Islamabad POL Ltd, Rwp, CNPGS Pakistan Tobacco Company, PCSIR, Khi Rafhan Maize Product Ltd CGGC-CMEC NJ PM KCP, Jauharabad 02 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Gas Lubricant Pressure Gauge (Pneumatic) Pressure Metrology Division Calibration Functional USA/ RUSKA/GE Accessories purchased under observation KRL, Rwp KCP-WCI, Juaharabad PINST, Islamabad > Shaigan Pharma, Rwp Nestle Pakistan Ltd SGS, Islamabad KCP- WCI, Juaharabad APF, PMEL, PAC Kamra NDC, Islamabad BF Bio Sciences CGGC-CMEC NJ PM Cherat Cement Company Ltd SGS, Pakistan Ltd Karachi PCSIR Lhr, Agha Khan Foundation, NDC, Islamabad POL Ltd, Rwp, CNPGS Pakistan Tobacco Company, PCSIR, Khi Rafhan Maize Product Ltd CGGC-CMEC NJ PM KCP, Jauharabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Electronic Dead Weight Tester Pressure Metrology Division Calibration SOP under Process USA/Fluke under Process KRL, Rwp KCP-WCI, Juaharabad PINST, Islamabad > Shaigan Pharma, Rwp Nestle Pakistan Ltd SGS, Islamabad KCP- WCI, Juaharabad APF, PMEL, PAC Kamra NDC, Islamabad BF Bio Sciences CGGC-CMEC NJ PM Cherat Cement Company Ltd SGS, Pakistan Ltd Karachi PCSIR Lhr, Agha Khan Foundation, NDC, Islamabad POL Ltd, Rwp, CNPGS Pakistan Tobacco Company, PCSIR, Khi Rafhan Maize Product Ltd CGGC-CMEC NJ PM KCP, Jauharabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer FRC Determination of major, minor and trace elements in fuel, water, and food samples Working PE-3300 USA 10 1 Director 021-99261962 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Thermocouple Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of client thermocouples R-Type, 2J13 K-Type, Model 2F05 E-Type 2H19 02 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Water Triple Point Cell rmal Metrology Divis Use for traceability of Ref. Stds. 01 for Ref Std PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Digital Thermometer Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Non-Functional Model YEW- 2572 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A High Precision Thermostatic Oil Bath Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Non-Functional Prolabo 99992 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Ultra Low Temperature Bath, Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Functional Model Heart Scientific 7380 2 in a month PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Liquid In Glass Thermometer Metrology Division Functional 2 in a month PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Zero Point Dry Well Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Functional Model 9101 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A RH Generator Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Functional Humilab 4 in month PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A RTE Bath/ Circulator Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Functional 9 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Humidity and Temperature Probe Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Functional Model HMP75 9 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A S-Type Thermocouple with Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Functional 3 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Resistance Thermometer Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Functional PT- 100 5 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Triple Point of Water Maintenance Bath Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of Ref. Stds. Functional Model 7312 01 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Water Triple Point Cell Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of Ref. Stds Functional Model 5901D-O PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Freezing Point of Furnace Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of Ref. Stds. Functional Model 9114 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Freezing Point of Indium Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of Ref. Stds Functional Model 5904 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Gallium Maintenance Apparatus Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of Ref. Stds Functional Model 5943 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Zinc Freezing Point Cell Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of Ref. Stds. Functional PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Standard Platinum Resistance Thermal Metrology Division Functional Model, 5698 PCSIR Lab Complex Lahore IDC Pvt Ltd, Islamabad ESBI International Saffron Pharmaceutical Faisalabad CITI Lab Rawalpindi Qarshi Research International Pvt Ltd PCSIR Lab Complex Karachi Agha Khan Foundation Rawalpindi AWC Hasanabdal POL Ltd, Rawalpindi CNPGS, Mianwali Shaigan Pharmaceuticals Rawalpindi NDC Islamabad SUPARCO Karachi AFfC Rawalpindi Scientific and Engineering Services Islamabad Directorate of Fisheries (R&T) Lahore SGS Pakistan Pvt Ltd Karachi KCP- II, Jauharabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Micro K Precision Thermometry Bridge Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of in-house equipment Functional 6 Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Temperature / Pressure Calibrator Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Model 525B 6 Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Working Standard PRT Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Model 5628 12 Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Thermocouple Furnace Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of equipment Functional Model 9112B 19 Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Humidity Temperature Meter Thermal Metrology Division Use for ref standards for calibration Functional Model RSI364 90 Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A RH/Temperature Meter Thermal Metrology Division Use for ref standards for calibration Functional OMEGA IDTS72 90 Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A RH/Temperature Meter Thermal Metrology Division Use for ref standards for calibration Functional OMEGA DOTS72- A 90 Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Aluminum Freeze Point Cell Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Temperature and Pressure Calibrator (525B) Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Three Zone Furnace Thermal Metrology Division Functional Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Silver Fixed Point Cell Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Isotech Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Copper Fixed Point Cell Thermal Metrology Division Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Isotech Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Fluidized Calibration Bath Thermal Metrology Division Non-Functional Isotech Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Mercury Fixed Point Cell Thermal Metrology Division Functional Isotech Attock Refinery Rawalpindi Nestle Pakistan Ltd, Islamabad AFIP Rawalpindi KRL Rawalpindi Health ways lab Rawalpindi HMC Taxila Indus prevision services Karachi Mari Petroleum Company Amson vaccines and pharma Pvt Ltd Nori Islamabad Fauji cement company Ltd Intermark Islamabd PTCKPK National Veterinary lab DESTO Islamabad KCP Workshop Khushab National Food Security 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A UV-Visible Spectrophotom eter Physico-ChemicalMeasurement Laboratory,Chemical metrology Division Analysis of different parameters like nitrate, nitrite, sulphate, phosphate etc , spectrum of different samples, color determination Functional 10 Anhui Construction and Engineering Group, Islamabad Govt. Degree College (W), Rawalpindi Mr. TalatYaqoob, Rawalpindi Elan Partner Pvt. Ltd. Islamabad Quad-i-Azam University Islamabad Islamic International University Islamabad NPSL inhouse R & D Projects MoST funded R & D Projects M/s AN Associates Consulting Structural & Earthquake Engineers, Rawalpindi DW & CE, SPD, Islamabad Vision Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. Islamabad Ebagooj Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Haripur, KJPK Poonch University, Rawalakot, Azad Kashmir Royal Airport Services, Islamabad Abaseen Pure Drinking Water, Mardan 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A High Pressure Liquid Chromategroup Chromatography Laboratory Analysis of Vitamins, Cholestrol etc Functional Waters 05 NPSL inhouse R & D Projects, MoST funded R & D Projects, Quad-i-Azam University Islamabad, Islamic International Uni Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A XRF Spectrometer XRF Laboratory, Chemical Metrology Division Analyses of oxides such as Al, Si, Mg, Ca, Sr, Fe, Cu etc in rocks, minerals and liquid samples Installation in Process Panalytic alZetium NA 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A ICP-MS ICP-MS Laboratory Chemical Metrology Division Trace/toxic metals in different matrices such as water, soil, food, rock, minerals, CRM etc Functional Agilent 7900 10 NPSL inhouse R & D Projects, MoST funded R &D Projects, Quad-i-Azam University Islamabad, Islamic International University Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrometer General Material Testing Laboratory Chemical Metrology Division Heavy Metal Analysis Working Analytik Jena, ContrAA -700 5-10 Minex International Qureshi Wool Industries Limited AI-Gohar Traders Air Head Quarters Shanzay International MRF HQ Civil works Organizations Saamia Impex TKT Soil Garrison Ittefaq Traders General Manager Mechanical POFs Shifa International Hospital Mia Technical Services Maroof International Hospital Iceberg Industries Farooq Ahmed Khan Finite Engineering Scomi Oil Tools Limited Rehmat and Co. HMC Sadiq Poultry Pvt. Limited Indus Valley Craft Sub-Division Officer PCSIR Laboratory Complex Sub-Division Officer COMSTECH M. Afaq Bhatti v*. Sonica Cables Farlax Enterprises Rekn Services, Rastgar Engineering Company 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Carbon Sulphur Determinator General Material Testing Laboratory Chemical Metrology Division Determination of C&S Functional Eltra CS2000 1-2 Minex International Qureshi Wool Industries Limited AI-Gohar Traders Air Head Quarters Shanzay International MRF HQ Civil works Organizations Saamia Impex TKT Soil Garrison Ittefaq Traders General Manager Mechanical POFs Shifa International Hospital Mia Technical Services Maroof International Hospital Iceberg Industries Farooq Ahmed Khan Finite Engineering Scomi Oil Tools Limited Rehmat and Co. HMC Sadiq Poultry Pvt. Limited Indus Valley Craft Sub-Division Officer PCSIR Laboratory Complex Sub-Division Officer COMSTECH M. Afaq Bhatti v*. Sonica Cables Farlax Enterprises Rekn Services, Rastgar Engineering Company 01 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrometer Analytical and Spectroscopic Measurement(ASM )Lab, CMD Analysis of metals in ores, minerals, water/wastewat er, solutions, coal, lubricating oils etc. Functional AAnalyst 100, Perkin Elmer, USA (Equipme nt ED: AAS/PE/ Analystl 00) 5-7 Shifa International Hospital, EBD. EMC Pakistan Pvt. Ltd. The Science School, Islamabad. Mir Bilal Zahid, Rawalpindi. AR Engineering, Islamabad, Younis & Brothers, Islamabad. MIA Technical Services, IBD; . Hotel Hill View, Islamabad. Waqar Constructor and. Developers, Islamabad. SCALA International, Islamabad Ittefaq Trading Co. Lhr. C&W Sub Divisional Officer, Mansehra. Project Management Organization, Rwp. Pak Gulf Construction, Islamabad. RAMADA Hotel, Islamabad. Minex International, Karachi. COMSTECH, Islamabad. DWP Technologies Pvt. Ltd, IBD. Dir Ganites Pvt. Ltd., Islamabad. Imperial Steel, Lahore: ICEBERG industries, Islamabad. Imperial Steel, Lahore. Shoib Khan, KPK. 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A Moisture . Analyzer Analytical and Spectroscopic Measurement(ASM )Lab, CMD Moisture determination . in salt, coal etc samples Functional Sartorius MA 50 (Equipme nt ID: AAS/ MM-01) 01 Waqar Constructor . and Developers, Islamabad SCOOMI Oil Tool, Islamabad 1 Director General 051-9265173 National Physical & Standards Laboratory (NPSL) N/A UV / VIS Spectrophotometer Analytical and Spectroscopic Measurement(ASM )Lab, CMD Calibration of Spectronic standards filters Functional Spectronic Instruments USA 02 PCSIR, Karachi PCS1R Labs., Lahore Shaigan Pharmaceutical, Rawalpindi PCRWR, Islamabad PSQCA, Karachi Qarshi Research Industries, Hattar Shakarganj, Bhone Shakarganj, Jhang TARA Group, Pakistn AMSON Vaccines, Islamaba Nestle Pakistan, Ltd., Islamabad 01 Director General 051-9265173 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Hot & Cold Heavy Duty Water Bath These baths are used to cool & warm samples of large volumes for their testing to study the effect of different temperature on the outer surface material, like electric cable insulator i.e. PVC material. Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A High Temperature Tube Furnace -1200 c CDLE Single zone versatile combustion furnace ideal for high temperature reaction under controlled atmosphere and catalytic material experimentations. Model No. (HTTF-1/06) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Muffle Furnace-1000 c CDLE Heat treatment of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, ashing, ignition, fusion of rocks and minerals, and annealing of glass. Model No. (MF-1/02) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Drying Oven CDLE For wide range of heating and drying applications, like glassware drying, dry sterilization, plant tissue drying, aging/curing studies, epoxy/plastic curing, textile, paper and rubber drying. 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Bench Top Centrifuge CDLE To separate colloidal particles or substances of different densities to remove moisture, for micro filtration, or to simulate gravitational effects Model No. (CG 1/07) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Cylindrical Water Bath CDLE To gently warm samples for biotechnology applications. Model No. (DCW 1/06) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Mercury Analyzer CEPS Estimation/analysis of mercury from waste water, Creams, Cosmetics, medicines and Food items. 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Bomb Calorimeter CEPS For the estimation of Gross calorific value from, Wood, Coal, Furnace Oil, Diesel etc. Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A UV-VIS Spectrophotometer Specord-200 CEPS Metals and non metals estimation in water and waste water through color development. Working Specord-200Analytical Jena 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Water Bath CEPS For distillation of Hexane in Oil and Grease of waste water samples. Working Germany 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Drying Oven CEPS Used for TDS water and wastewater analysis Working Germany 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A pH Meter CEPS USA 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A BOD System CEPS For BOD estimation of, wastewater/sewage water Working AQUALYTIC Austria 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Temperature & Humidity Data logger EMTL Temp. & Humidity Measurement Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Intelligent Digital Power Meter UI 2008 EMTL Power Analyzer Working China 25 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Draught Free Chamber EMTL Draught Free Chamber Working 15 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Ball Pressure Test Apparatus EMTL Indent Measurement Working 15 times in a month Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Multimeter EMTL Voltage/ Current/ Resistance Measurement Working 50 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Reference Ballasts EMTL Standard Ballast Working 20 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Reference Lamps EMTL Standard Lamp Working 20 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Oscilloscope, TDS 3000B, Tek Tronix EMTL Sine wave measurement Working 20 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Multi -way Life Tester EMTL Life Test of Lamps/ LEDs Working 15 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Spectroradiometric, Colorimetric & Electric System EMTL Electric & Photometric Parameter of lamps Working 20 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Needle Flame Tester, ZY-2, SENSING EMTL To determine the fire hazards of insulation and combustible materials Working 15 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Temperature Meter of Lamp Caps & Luminous Test DT-3C Luminaries EMTL Temperature & Luminous Measurement Working 15 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Torque Meter for Lamp Caps DTF 62 EMTL Torque Measurement Working SENSING 25 times Lighting & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Paperless Recorder (Temperature Recorder), R-5000, EMTL Temperature Recorder Working Sensing 28 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A PSURGE 8000 Controller (Impulse Test System) EMTL Impulse Tester Working HAEFELY 30 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Glow Wire Tester, EMTL Heat Resistance Test Working SENSING 15 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Tracking Tester, LDQ-62, EMTL Appliances enclosure Material Test Working SENSING 15 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Plug Tumbling Barrel Tester EMTL Plug Test of appliances cord Working GT7303, GOTECH 15 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Cord Anchorage Tester,GT-7305, GOTECH EMTL Cable/ Cord Tester Working 20 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Stop Watch EMT Time Measurement Working 30 times Electrical Home Appliances 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Creepage and Clearance Gauge Set EMT Creepage& Clearance Working 20 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Fan & other Electrical Industry EMT Impact Test Working 20 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Electrical Continuity Indicator, EMT Continuity Test Working ED&D 20 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Leakage Current Tester, EMT Leakage Current Test Working USA 30 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Power Hi-tester, 3332, EMT Power Measurement Test Working HIOKI 35 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A AC Withstanding Voltage Hitester, HIOKI EMTL High Voltage Test Working Hitester, 3158, HIOKI 35 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Insulation Tester with Calibration Unit EMTL Insulation Test Working 35 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Test Nail, T5-76 EMTL Checking of gap with Force test Working 30 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Rigid Test Finger, T5-41 EMTL Checking of gap with Force test Working 30 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Jointed Test Finger, T5-75 with Dynamometers 20N, 100 N EMTL Checking of gap with Force test Working 30 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Force Gauge, EMTL Force application Test Working PFI-200N, ED&D 30 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Force Gauge EMTL Force application Test Working PFI-50N, ED&D 20 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Tachometer, RM-100, EMTL Spread Measurement Working PROVA 20 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A AC Dielectric Test Set, 615-2P, EMTL Dielectric Strength Test Working PHENIX 30 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A AC Power Supply Source 10 KVA EMTL Power source for Fan Testing Working 45 times Fan & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Vernier Caliper, Swiss Made EMTL Dimension Measurement Working Swiss 45 times Cable & other Electrical 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Micrometer EMTL Dimension Measurement Working EMTL 30 times Cable & other Electrical 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A 300 Digital Profile Projector, Rational EMTL Dimension Measurement Test Working 30 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Hi-Lo Temperature & Humidity Programme Test Equipment, EMTL Temp. & Humidity Treatment Chamber Working SENSING 30 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Programmable Temperature & Humidity Chamber EMTL Temp. & Humidity Treatment Chamber Working 35 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Cutting Machine for Dumble EMTL Sample Preparation Device Working 25 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Cold Bend Test Apparatus with Mandrels EMTL Cold Bend Test of Cable Working 25 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Impact Test Apparatus with Weights EMTL Impact Test for Cable Working 25 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Indentation Device with Weights EMTL Heat Distortion Test of Cable Working 40 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Single Piece Cable Vertical Flame Tester EMTL Flame Propagation Test Working China 15 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Flexible Cable Flexing Tester, GOTECH EMTL Flexing Test of Flexible Cable Working GT-7301, GOTECH 20 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Electronic Analytical and Precision Balance, SARTORIUS EMTL Weighing samples Working GE812, SARTORIUS810 gm (max) 40 times Cable & other 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Micro Ohmmeter, EMTL Resistance Measurement Working Cropico, England 30 times Cable & other Electrical Industry 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Hydrostatic Head Tester ACRC Water Penetrating in Fabric Working Mesdan 12 M/s Resuce 1122, Lahore M/s NDMA, Islamabad M/s Multiwear Garments, Lahore M/s Universal Trading Corporation, Lahore M/s Food Department, Lahore 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Nep Tester ACRC Impurity in fiber Working Mesdan 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Yarn Board Winder ACRC Evenness in yarn Working Mesdan 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Wrinkle Recovery Tester ACRC Resistivity of wrinkle in fabric Working SDL 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Weather-o-Meter ACRC Color fastness properties Working Atlas Ci 3000+ 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Stiffness Tester ACRC Softening of fabric Working SDL 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Spray Rating Tester ACRC Water proofing Working Mesdan 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Spectrophotometer ACRC To analyze Formaldehyde contents in fabric Data Color/SF 650 X 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Per spirometer Kits ACRC Color fastness of perspiration Working SDL 4 M/s H2Aim (Pvt.) Ltd., Lahore M/s Haris Traders, Lahore M/s Ring Road Authority, Lahore 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Oscillatory Abrasion Tester ACRC Abrasion resistance of heavy duty fabric Working Mesdan 2 M/s Ring Road Authority, Lahore M/s Haris Traders, Lahore 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Martindale Abrasion & Pilling Tester ACRC Abrasion &Pilling resistance of fabric and garments Working SDL 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Launder-ometer ACRC To analyze Color fastness properties Working SDL 1 M/s Resuce 1122, Lahore 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Drape-ometer ACRC Softness of fabric Working Mesdan 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Sponge Pilling Tester ACRC Pilling resistance of fabric Working SDL 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Air Permeability Tester ACRC Air permeability of fabric Working Mesdan 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Refractrometer Atago 3T ACRC Purity of chemicals and research activity for determination of refractive index Working Abbe, Japan 10-12/month 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Viscometer (Manual) For conducting viscosities of Petroleum products Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Data Color Spectrophotometer ACRC For the analysis of brightness and opacity of paper bleach board and art paper. Working SF 650, USA 70-80/month Text book boards of provincial capitals and Universities and Colleges. 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A pH Meter ACRC pH measurement of different cosmetics items etc Working HANNA, Switzerland 10/month Cosmetics, Cleansing products, Hair dyes, Soaps detergents and chemicals. 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Rotary Evaporator ACRC Refractive index measurement of essential oils, edible oils, animal fats and for butyrometeric value of milk fats. Working Hedolph, Germany 6/month Dairy fats, Essential Oils, Edible oils, Cosmetics and Herbal products. 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A TLC Apparatus ACRC Fractionation, identification, qualitative analysis of chemicals & different organic chemicals Working Jobling Laboratory Division 4/month Oils Fats Fatty acids Synthetic dyes Natural dyes Cosmetics 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A LRX Material Testing Machine ACRC Tear & tensile strength of leather, textile & polymer materials. Working LLOYD-UK 4/month Leather manufacturer ers, Polymers, PVC industries,Fabric analysis. 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Gas Chromatograph ACRC Analysis of banned amines, preservatives, anti-allergic substances in leather and its products Working GC 3800 Varian 10/month Kinnow exports. PT Samples 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A UV Spectrophotometer ACRC Analytical research & development work on pharmaceutical raw materials formulation and cosmetics formulation working Shimadzu 10/month Pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, cosmetic, industrial chemicals 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A HPLC Shimadzu Analytical research & development work on pharmaceutical raw materials formulation and cosmetics formulation Working 8-15/month Pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, cosmetis ACRC Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A FT-IR For identification of compounds Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A GC-MS ACRC Compound solution of the sample quantitative testing all the organic samples Working Agilent 5890 12 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Electric Oven MPS (MPRC) Analytical Section MPRC Drying of Samples 12 PCSIR 3 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Analytical Balance Coal Section MPS (MPRC) Analytical Section MPRC Weighing samples Working Sartorious 12 3 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Lab Scale Water Distillation Apparatus Coal Section MPRC Distilled Water Working Local 10 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Water Bath MPS (MPRC) For warming of samples Working PCSIR 4 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Drying Oven Coal Section MPRC For drying samples Working PCSIR 10 2 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrometer Engg. Services Centre For analysis of Metallic Elements Top Well TW-1065 Taiwan Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Lathe Machine Engg. Services Centre Machining Purpose Working China/Pak 18-20 Local Industry/PCSIR In House 3 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A CMM (Coordinate Measurement Machine) Engg. Services Centre Size clarification Purpose Working ChenWeiTaiwan 01-02 Local Industry/PCSIR In House 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A CNC Turning Machine Engg. Services Centre Machining Purpose Working T6, LTC25 ALM Taiwan 06-08 Local Industry/PCSIR In House 3 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A CNC Machine Engg. Services Centre Machining Purpose Working Top Well TW-1065 Taiwan 08-10 Local Industry/PCSIR In House 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Electric Oven, Max. 250oC To dry materials Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Spectrophotometer UV - 160 To find the concentration of solutes in solution Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Color & Color Difference Meter To measure whiteness and brightness Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A pH. Meter To measure hydrogen-ion concentration Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Optical Pyrometer, Max. 2000oC To measure temperatures Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Electric Furnace, Max. 1200oC PITMAEM To heat materials at controlled temperatures Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Carbolite Furnace, Max. 1000oC PITMAEM To heat materials at controlled temperatures Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Induction Furnace (200kg) PITMAEM For melting/casting of metals Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Induction Furnace (10 kg, 50kgs) PITMAEM For melting/casting of metals Working Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Rotary Furnace PITMAEM For melting/casting of metals Working Local 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Cupola Furnace PITMAEM For melting/casting of metals Working Local 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Value Arc Wire Coating System PITMAEM Thermal spray coating unit for reclamation and ceramic coatings Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Oxy-fuel powder coating system with accessories PITMAEM Thermal spray coating unit for reclamation and ceramic coatings Working SulzerMetco, USA) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Plasma Spraying System PITMAEM Thermal spray coating unit for reclamation and ceramic coatings Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Vulcanizing Press for Jewelry PITMAEM For pressing of jewelry parts Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Electric Furnace (carbolite) (1500C) PITMAEM For heat treatment purposes Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Muffle Furnace (1200 C) PITMAEM For heat treatment purposes Working Local 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Degassing Furnace (1000 C) PITMAEM For heat treatment purposes Working Local 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Wax Injector PITMAEM For pattern making of jewelry parts Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Vulcanizing Press for Jewelry PITMAEM For pattern making of jewelry parts Working Local 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Rolling Mill PITMAEM For rolling of metallic samples Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Gas Fired Furnace PITMAEM For casting of metals Working Local 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Forging Press 100 tons PITMAEM For forging of samples Working Local 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Yamato Furnace PITMAEM For heat treatment of metallic samples Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Manual Mounting Press PITMAEM For mounting of small samples for microscopic analysis Working Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Compact Hydraulic Press 200 Ton PITMAEM For pressing of metallic objects at low load Working Local 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Charpy Impact Testing Machine PITMAEM For impact testing of metallic samples Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Tensile Testing Machine PITMAEM For tensile testing of plastic, polymer, fabric and thin wire samples Working (Shimadzu, Japan) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Rotary Bending Fatigue Testing Machine PITMAEM For bending test of metals Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Universal Tensile Testing Machine 1000kN PITMAEM For tensile testing of metallic samples Working (Jinan, China) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Ultrasonic Wall Thickness Gauge PITMAEM For sheet/wall thickness measurement for on-site testing Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Wear and Friction Measurement Set up PITMAEM For wear &friction measurement of metals Working (Jinan, China) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Refractometer PITMAEM For refractro-index measurements Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Digital Conductivity Meter PITMAEM For analysis of surface roughness of metallic samples Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Pin on Disk Tribometer PITMAEM For wear & friction testing of bulk and nano-composite coatings Working (CSM, Switzerland) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with complete EDX facilities PITMAEM For microstructural analysis of metals at high magnifications/ Fractographic analysis of fractured parts Working (Hitachi 3700N, Japan) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Laser for Jewelry Marking PITMAEM For laser engraving on metallic parts Working (SiroLasertech, Germany) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Densitometer PITMAEM Density measurement of materials Working (Gibitre, Italy) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Micro X-Ray Flouresence Spectrometer PITMAEM For chemical analysis of precious metals (gold, silver, etc.) Working Spectro, Germany) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Laser Particle Size Analyzer PITMAEM For particle size measurements of powders/liquids in micron size Working (Fritsch, Germany) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Kjeldahl Digestion Unit PITMAEM For oxidation of different solutions Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Dilatometer PITMAEM For thermal characterization of materials at high temperature Working (Orton, USA) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Differntial Scanning Calorimeter (DSC)/Thermo Gravimetric Analyzer PITMAEM For corrosion analysis of samples in different environments Working Germany 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Potentiostat for corrosion testing PITMAEM For pH measurement of different solutions Working 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Carbon Sulphur Determinator PITMAEM For carbon &Sulphur analysis of metallic samples Working (Leco, USA) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A CalotestCalomax with grinding balls PITMAEM For coating thickness measurement Working (Switzerland) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A PVD Coating Equipment PITMAEM For functional Nano-coatings and biocompatible coatings on surgical, dental and industrial tools Under maintenance Platit 80, Switzerland 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Scanning Probe Microscope PITMAEM For surface topographical analysis of Nano-coatings Required upto date software 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Nano Hardness PITMAEM For hardness and tear testing of Nano-coatings Working (CSM, Switzerland) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Analytical Balance Weighing of samples Working 25-50 R&D Samples and Nestle, Gourmet Foods, Milllac Foods, Fauji Foods, Engro Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Vacuum Impregnation Apparatus PITMAEM For metallography purposes Working (Struers, Denmark) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Emission Spectrometer PITMAEM For Chemical analysis of ferrous &nonferrous alloys Working (GNR, Italy) 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Homogenizer (High Speed) FBRC Homogenize samples Working LEESON (USA) Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Glutamate Gluten determination Working 5 Safina foods, Ghousia floor mill 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Packing machine FBRC Sample packing Working Sachet Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Vortex mixer FBRC Mixing of samples working Labnet, USA 30 Nestle Pakistan Tetra pak, Pakistan Guranwala Foods Bunneys Michells Dawn bread Rafhan Foods Al Riaz, Rice Mills Basma Rice Mills Super Rice Mills Shakarganj Foods SGS, Pkistan CitroPak Shezan PFA WASA Qarshi Labs. PEL Acha Foods OReal Foods Hamza Foods Six B Foods etc 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Coliform water bath FBRC Micro Testing Working Shell Lab, USA 30-100 Nestle Pakistan Tetra pak, Pakistan Guranwala Foods Bunneys Michells Dawn bread Rafhan Foods Al Riaz, Rice Mills Basma Rice Mills Super Rice Mills Shakarganj Foods SGS, Pkistan CitroPak Shezan PFA WASA Qarshi Labs. PEL Acha Foods OReal Foods Hamza Foods Six B Foods etc 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Horizontal electrophoresis FRBC DNA Analysis Working 6 Used for research purposes 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Incubator FBRC Testing of microbial samples Working Jouan, ambient 30-100 Nestle Pakistan Tetra pak, Pakistan Guranwala Foods Bunneys Michells Dawn bread Rafhan Foods Al Riaz, Rice Mills Basma Rice Mills Super Rice Mills Shakarganj Foods SGS, Pkistan CitroPak Shezan PFA WASA Qarshi Labs. PEL Acha Foods OReal Foods Hamza Foods Six B Foods etc 2 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Light Microscope FBRC Microbiological Examination working Meiji, MT 30 Nestle Pakistan Tetra pak, Pakistan Guranwala Foods Bunneys Michells Dawn bread Rafhan Foods Al Riaz, Rice Mills Basma Rice Mills Super Rice Mills Shakarganj Foods SGS, Pkistan CitroPak Shezan PFA WASA Qarshi Labs. PEL Acha Foods OReal Foods Hamza Foods Six B Foods etc 1 Director General 042-99230697 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Thermal Cycler (PCR Machine) FBRC DNA Amplification working BioRad, My Cycler 10 Used for research purposes 1 Director General 042-99230697 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A ASTM Sieves FRC Grain size analysis Working ASTM USA 22 12 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Ash fusion determinator FRC Fusibility of Ash (Reducing) Determinator of Temperature DT Sphere Temperature ST Hemisphere Temperature HT Flow Temperature FT Non-Functional AC-600 LECO, USA NA 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Auto Chemistry system FRC Estimation of chloride and fluoride in coal and water samples Working 960 ORION 02 02 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Bomb calorimeters FRC Determination of Gross Calorific Value & Net Calorific Value Working i- PARR-1241 USA ii- PARR 6300USA 22 02 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Briquetting machine DH-100 FRC Coal / coke / biomass Briquetting Working K.R. Komarek USA 10 01 Director 021-99261962 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Adhesion of Finish LTD/ LRC Adhesion to finish Functional England SATRASTD 112 10 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Analogue Leather Softness Tester LTD/ LRC Use for softness of leather & textile Functional EnglandST 300 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Auto Fastness Tester LTD/ LRC Use for Color Fastness Leather Functional EnglandSTM 461 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Auto shaving machine* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional JapanKitamuraWorking width 120 cm 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Bench-top pH Meter multi-purpose CRD/ LRC Acidity/TDS/Conductivity Functional PL-700Taiwan 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Briquetting press FRC Coal / coke / biomass Briquetting Working B-220-18, SKR, Komarek USA 02 01 Director 021-99261962 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Boiler RU& ED/ LRC Generation of steam to operate machines required for mechanical operation Non Functional PakistaniEngr.works,GujratHorizontal,Size 11x6ft. 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Centrifuge LTD/ LRC Centrifuge for enzymes Functional UKCenturion Scientific 5 1 Director General 021-99333372 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Cloud and pour point analyzer FRC Pour and Cloud point of liquid Working Petro Test 06 01 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A CHNS Elemental Analyzer FRC Ultimate Analysis of Coal/Coke Not Working Euro vector EA-3000 NA 01 Director 021-99261962 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Conditioning Chamber LTD/ LRC For conditioning of sample Functional KoreaLab. Tech. Daily 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Colour Assessment Cabinet LTD/ LRC Asses color under specific light Functional Local PCSIR 15 1 Director General 021-99333372 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Drum mixer FRC Screw / Sieving Working Model 05-mixer Simpson National USA Engineering Co. USA 02 01 Director 021-99261962 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A COD Reactor CRD/ LRC Determination Chemical Oxygen Demand in wastewater Functional HACHP/N 45600,00 120 0C 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Flue Gas Analyzer FRC Monitor of Flue Gases of SOx, NOx, CO, CO2, O2, and temperature Working Testo 350 XL 05 01 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Flash Point Apparatus FRC Working ISL 05 01 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Gas Chromatograph (GC) FRC Specification & Identification of Organic Compounds Non- Working Perkin-Elmer Sigma-2000 USA NA 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Generator (100 KV) FRC Standby Power supply Working Siemens NA 01 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Hardgrove grindibility tester FRC Hardness of Coal / Coke Working Sepor, Inc. USA 08 01 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) FRC Separation, identification, quantification or purification the individual components of the mixture Not Working WAT-007093 S. No. 000137 NA 01 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Light Meter FRC Light Sensor Working Extech / LT-10 03 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Muffle resistance Furnace FRC Determination of ash content in coal, coke samples Working Model 850021, China 22 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Muffle Furnace FRC Determination of volatile matter in coal, coke samples Working Thermolyne Corporation USA, model No: FA10520P-1 22 02 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Microwave digester FRC Digestion of coal, coke, soil and food samples Working CEM, MSD-2000 USA 05 01 Director 021-99261962 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Cooled incubator CRD/ LRC Involved in BOD determination Functional PCSIR200920 0C 2 One Director General 021-99333372 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Nitrogen liquefier FRC Liquefy N2 gas Not Working AC-600 USA NA 1 Director 021-99261962 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Crock Meter LTD/LRC Use for color fastness of Leather & Textile Functional Local, Made by LRC Engg. Dept 15 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Equipment for Conditioning LTD/ LRC For conditioning of lab. Functional LocalCool point 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A For conditioning of lab. CRD/ LRC Element detection Functional For conditioning of lab. 02 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Fleshing machine* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional GermanyFTJ Chalagler.Working width 130 cm 5 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Flexometer LTD/ LRC Use for Flexing Functional England4086 5 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A FTIR CRD/ LRC Functional Group Determination in Samples Non Functional thermo Nicolet Avatar 330 EZ OMNIC V6.1A 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Furnace CRD/ LRC Ash Content Functional China8408601000 0C 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Glazing machine RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation 2 GermanyMoenus-Turner Glass cylinder 10cm 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A HPLC-PDA CRD/ LRC Organic Molecules Separation (LC) & Detection (UV) Functional Lab AllianceSpectra system UV 6000. LP.Quaternary pump, PDA Detector 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Hydraulic press.* RU & ED/LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional Germany Krause Working width 124 cm 5 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Incubator CRD/ LRC Incubate of Media Functional TurkeyES-500 Daily 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Lab. Microprocessor Centrifuge CRD/ LRC Centrifuge during Resin Synthesis Functional Digisystem laboratory Instrument inc 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Laminar Air Flow LTD/ LRC Use for microbiological work Functional Local 15 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Lastometer LTD/ LRC Use for ball burst Test Functional EnglandSTRA STD 104 15 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Microwave Extraction System(Start E) CRD/ LRC Extraction of Analytes in Samples Non Functional MilestoneMicrowave Digester/ Extractor 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Milling wooden drum (semi pilot scale) RU& ED/ LRC Softness of Leather Process Functional PakistanShalimar, Lahore4x5 10 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Manual spray with compressor RU& ED/ LRC Finishing of Leather process Functional PakistanShalimar,LahoreOne spray guns 10 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Manual buffing machine RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional PakistaniImdad, Lahore Working width 23cm 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Use for Tear, tensile, bursting strength etc. testing LTD/ LRC Use for Tear, tensile, bursting strength etc. testing Functional EnglandH5KS Daily 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Orbital Shaker LTD/ LRC shaking Functional StuartSSMI150 RPM 1 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Oven (ventricle) CRD/ LRC Moisture Determination in Leather Functional GermanyMMM-Gaoup2200C 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Penetrometer LRC PCSIR Use for water Penetration Functional England5220Bally5039 12 2 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A pH Meter CRD/ LRC Acidity/Basicity Functional HANNAHI 85211-14 Daily 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Plastic drum (experimental) RU& ED/ LRC Chemical Leather Process Functional PakistanShalimar,Lahore1.5x2 15 Two Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Polishing machine* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional JapanHirohitoWorking width 23 cm 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Pressure Cutter RU& ED/ LRC Use for cutting of leather samples Functional Local Daily 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Resiliometer LTD/ LRC Use for resilience of insole Functional Local, Made by LRC Engg. Dept. 1 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Rotary Evaporator CRD/ LRC Extraction of Compounds at Reduced Pressure Functional Germany6206 225 0C, 100 KPA Daily 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Rotary Shaker CRD/ LRC Shaking Functional Local 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Rotary spray with drying chamber* LRC PCSIR Finishing of Leather process Non Functional JapanNILTAEight spray guns 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Rub Fastness LTD/ LRC Use for Color Fastness Leather Functional EnglandSTM 102 5 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Sammying machine* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional GermanyFTJ Chalagler.Working width 128 cm 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Sammying/setting outmachine* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional Germany FTJ Chalagler Working width 128 cm 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Shaking Water Bath CRD/ LRC Extraction of Formaldehyde into Leather Functional KoreaBS-11100 0C 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Shrinkage Temperature Apparatus LTD/ LRC Shrinkage of leather Functional EnglandSATRA 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Spectrophotometer CRD/ LRC Hexavalent Chrome Functional HACHDR-2000400-900 nm Daily 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Spectrophotometer DR6000 CRD/ LRC Wastewater analysis Functional Hach 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A SS Reaction Vessel CRD/ LRC Semi Pilot (10-20 Kg) Production of Resin/Binders Functional Local Made On Demand 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Shaving machine (small) RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional PakistanImdad, Lahore Working width 25 cm 5 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Splitting machine* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional GermanyMoenus-TurnerWorking width 140 cm 1 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Stoning machine* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional JapanHirohitoWorking width 25 cm 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer (NMR) FRC Determination of the content and purity of a sample as well as its molecular structure Not Working Varian, VXR-300151 NA 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Petrography System FRC Petrography Not Working Beuheler, USA NA 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Pollution monitoring set FRC Determination of PM10 in air Working Andersen, 1200 03 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Proximate Analyzer FRC Determination of moisture, volatile matter, ash content and fixed carbon in Coal/Coke Not Working MAC-600 LECO, USA NA 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Sample pulverizer FRC Fine Grinding Working Sepor, 501XL USA 22 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Sound Level; Meter FRC Noise Level measurement Working Extech / SL-10 03 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Spectrometer Bausch & Lomb FRC measure absorbance and transmittance over a range of wavelengths Working USA, Spectronic-21 07 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Sulphur Determinator FRC Analysis of total Sulfur Working SC-132, LECO, USA 22 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A TGA Analyzer FRC Determination of moisture, volatile matter, ash content fixed carbon and loss on ignition in Coal/Coke Working TGA-2000A Spain 10 1 Director 021-99261962 Fuel Research Centre PCSIR(FRC,Karachi) N/A Viscometer FRC Viscosity of liquid Not Working ISL NA 1 Director 021-99261962 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Toe impact resistance tester RU& ED/ LRC Use for impact resistance of toe Functional Local, Made by LRC Engg. Dept. 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Toggle dryer* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional JapanNILTASix, area of each plate 360x162cm2 5 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A UV Spectrophotometer CRD/ LRC Formaldehyde Determination in Leather Functional ThermoNicolet evolution 100190-1100 nm 4 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Vacuum dryer* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional JapanNILTADouble, area of each plate 175x34cm2 1 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Velcro Fatigue Tester LTD/ LRC Use for fatique Functional England SATRASTD 456 1 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Vibrating staking machine* RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional JapanHirohitoWorking width 122 cm 2 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Water Bath CRD/ LRC Steam Heating Functional PCSIRRW-1/02100 0C Daily 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Water Vapour Permeability Tester LTD/ LRC Air Permeability Testing of leather Functional England SATRASTDM 473 10 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Wheel staking machine RU& ED/ LRC Mechanical Leather operation Functional PakistaniImdad, Lahore Working circular 25cm 02 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Wooden drum (experimental) RU& ED/ LRC Chemical Leather Process Functional PakistanShalimar,Lahore 3x4 15 2 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Wooden drum (semi pilot scale) RU& ED/ LRC Chemical Leather Process Functional PakistanShalimar,Lahore4x5 10 1 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Wooden drum* (pilot scale production) RU& ED/ LRC Chemical Leather Process 01 Functional 01 Non Functional PakistanShalimar,Lahore 7x8 2 2 Director General 021-99333372 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Wrinkleo meter LTD/ LRC Use for wrinkle test Functional England SATRA 1 1 Director General 021-99333372 National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE sdfds fsdf fdsdsfsdsfds Functional sdfdsf sdfsd sdfds sdf sdfsdfs Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Automatic Laminator (with 2200 mm x 3600 mm) Lamination Lab Used for laminating Solar Panel Assemblies. Functional (Wuhan Tech- nology, China) Capacity:4 x300 W NA 01 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Solder Strip Cutting Machine Lamination Lab Used to cut the PV ribbon for soldering purposes Functional (Wuhan Tech- nology, China) Capacity: 300 W NA 01 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A ewrwer werwe 42344 Functional wer 12 234234 11 423423 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Panel Assembly Position Tester Lamination Lab It provides Voc before lamination. Functional (Wuhan Tech-nology, China) Capacity: 300 W NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Automatic Framing Machine Lamination Lab Used for framing the laminated solar panels for transportation and protection. Functional (Wuhan Tech-nology, China) Capacity: 300 W NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar PV System PCRET For electrification of office Functional PV Panel (250-300 W)- 5kW (Make: PCRET) Inverter (Hybrid-MPPT)- 5kW (Make: Baykee) Batteries: Dry Battery, 12V 200 Ah (Make: Baykee)- 4 No's. Cell: Lead Acid Cell, 2V 600 Ah (Make: Exide), 48 No's. NA 03 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A DC System PCRET For electrification of street and garden lights inside PCRET office. Functional 2 x Batteries (12, 200 Ah) 4 x Panel (250 Watts) NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Auto Tracking System PCRET Dripping system for garden and for water storage Functional Specs: 2.5 kW Motor (Make: China) 2.5 kW PV Panel (Make: PCRET) Auto Tracker NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar PV Panel PCRET For power generation Functional Specs: Mono/Poly Crystalline 100, 150, 200, 250 and 300 W PV Panels NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Rickshaw PCRET For indoor transportation Functional Specs: Capacity- 5 Seats Batteries- 5 x 12V, 40 Ah PV Module- Flexible 300 W NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Rickshaw- 2 PCRET For indoor transportation Functional Specs: Capacity- 5 Seats Batteries- 5 x 12V, 48 Ah PV Module- Flexible 200 W NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Model House PCRET DC System for demonstration purpose. Functional Specs: 200 Watt DC System with 12 hours Backup 1 x 200 Watt PV Panel 1 x 100 Ah Battery NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Biogas Plant PCRET For production of Bio-gas for cooking purpose. Functional Specs: 2 x 2m3 NA 2 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Green House Dryer Specs: 200-300 kg capacity For drying of fruits and vegetables Functional Specs: 200-300 kg capacity NA 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Module Repairing Table (De-Lamination Machine) Lamination Lab Used to de- laminate the laminated panels. Functional (Wuhan Technology, China) Capacity: 300 W NA 1 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Module Repairing Table (De-Lamination Machine) Lamination Lab Used to de- laminate the laminated panels. Functional (Wuhan Technology, China) Capacity: 300 W 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Module Repairing Table (De-Lamination Machine) Lamination Lab Used to de- laminate the laminated panels. Functional (Wuhan Tech- nology, China) Capacity: 300 W 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Cell Scriber / Cutting Machine Lamination Lab Solar Cells for desired use. Functional Used for cutting 01 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Solar Cell Tester Testing Lab Used for determination of Efficiency, Fill Factor, Power, Voltage Functional uhan (W Tech- nolo gy, China) 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A PV Module Tester Testing Lab Used for determination of Efficiency, Fill Factor, Power, Voltage & Current etc. of Solar PV Modules. Functional (Wuhan Tech- nology, China) Capacity: 300 W 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A PV Module Tester Testing Lab Used for determination of Efficiency, Fill Factor, Power, Voltage & Current etc. of Solar PV Modules. Functional (Wuhan Tech- nology, China) Capacity: 300 W 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Cell Tester Testing Lab Used for determination / Visualization / Detection of cracks and defected/ broken parts a Solar Cells/ Module Functional (Wuhan Tech- nology, China) Capacity: 300 W 01 Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A Hipot Dielectric Analyzer 7650 Testing Lab Used for testing of PV Modules Insulation (Resistance) at high Voltages as a Safety Test Functional (Associate d Research, Inc) 01 Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A Digatron Battery Testing System Testing Lab Used to test Battery Capacity the terms of theSimulation/Com puterized system Functional (Digatron Firing Circuits Germany) Capacity: 40 A 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Environmental Chamber Testing Lab Used to test PV Modules at temperatures and Relative Humidity (RH) Functional (Welltech Instru. Co. Hong Kong) Capacity: 150 W different 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Illuminometer Testing Lab Used to check sun insolation/ irradiance/intens . ity Functional Jim-100 (Kyocera Corp. Japan) Capacity: upto1500 W/m2 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Luxmeter Testing Lab Used for the ascertainment of the needed brightness of a device Functional MS-1500 (Conrad Electronic, Germany) Capacity: upto 40000 lux 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Solar Geyser Testing System Testing Lab Used to test efficiency of Solar Geysers Functional Capacity: Solar Geyser of any size/capacity 01 Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A Battery Tester Testing Lab Used to find battery capacity through manual procedure Functional SBS BCT-5000 (SBS Inc. USA) Capacity: upto 150 A 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Specific Gravity Meter Testing Lab Used to measure liquid gravity/ density Functional (SBS Inc. USA) 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Variable Voltage Battery Charger (50 Volts, 50 A) Testing Lab to charge batteryupto 48 Functional LocalUsed made in Karachi,Volts Pakistan 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A PV Module Tester Testing Lab Used to find FF & Efficiency of PV Modules Functional (Spectra Nova, Canada) Capacity: 300 W 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A SPI Array Tester Testing Lab Used to find FF of PV Modules by using I-V Curve Functional Spire Corp., USA Capacity: upto 60 kW 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Heat Resistive Vacuum System Testing Lab Used for Thin Film Deposition (Thermal Evaporation) Functional Germany / LEYBOLD Specs: 220V, 50A 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Electron Beam Vacuum System Advance PV Lab Used for Thin Film Deposition (Thermal Evaporation) Functional Germany / LEYBOLD Specs: 220V, 63A 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Electron Beam Vacuum System Advance PV Lab Used for Thin Film Deposition (Thermal Evaporation) Unfunctional Germany / LEYBOLD Specs: 220V, 63A 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Gloves Box (old) Advance PV Lab Characterization Functional Pakistan 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Gloves Box (new) Advance PV Lab Characterization Functional China 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Sun Sun Simulator Advance PV Lab Characterization Functional Canada/SF 150 Specs: 220V,150 W 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Hot plate with Stirrer Advance PV Lab Used for Homogeneous mixing of solutions Functional Corning Specs: 220/240V, 410/480W 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A 78 HW-1 Hot plate with Stirrer Advance PV Lab Used for Homogeneous mixing of solutions Functional China 01 Pakistan Council for Renewable Energy Technologies(PCRET) N/A Hot Plate Advance PV Lab Heating Functional Pakistan/P CSIR Specs: 0- 350C 01 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Turbidity and Tide Gauge Not Provided Functional NA NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Automatic Weather Station (A.W.S) Complete Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A DST-CT (Temperature Conductivity Logging sensor) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A South Automatic Level Machine, Model with Tripot stand & stuff Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Acoustic Current Profiler (Current Meter) A.D.C.P. Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Turbidity Meter. Micro TPI & Micro TPW HF Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Freeze Dry System (LABCONCO USA) Not Provided Functional i) 4.5 Liter Console Cat No. 77510-01 ii) Vacuum Stoppering Adapter iii) Vacuum Pump Cat No. 7739-04 iv) THREADED VIALS 10ml v) Stoppers vi) Fast Freeze Flask 1200 ml vii) Fast Freeze Flask 1000ml viii) Fast Freeze Flask 150ml ix) Fast Freeze Flask 600ml NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Auto Titrator Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Automatic pipette Unit Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A FIMS-100 Complete system Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Soxhlet apparatus Germany Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Refractometer salinity (Atago Japan) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A GC-MS(agilent) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A HPLC (Agilent) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Spectrophotometer (LS55 Luminescence) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A pH meter Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Digital PH Meter Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A pH / mv/ Temp Meter Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Digital Salinity Meter Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Dissolve Oxygen Meter Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Dissolve Oxygen Meter spare membrane Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Water Quality Meter (DS-5) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Vacuum Pump 50x12(Millipore) + Vacuum filtering flask (Millipore) + Stifle Holder (Millipore) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A DGPS system sea star 3100LR, 12D Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Sieve Set Steel 3,2,1 (Geo-lab) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Distillation plant (Germany) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Water Quality Instrument / Meter Not Provided Functional (Hydrolab- U 22XD), with cable 30 M monitor data logger and recorder, pH, DO, Conductivity, Salinity, TDS, sediment, water specific gravity, temp, turbidity, depth, oxidation reduction potential in carrying case & calibration standard solutions NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Bongo Net System Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Spectrophotometer Not Provided Functional Model-DR 2400, HACH, USA with sample cell adapter Battery Eliminator operation and Procedure manual with software and cable NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Vacuum Pump, Vacuum Filteration assembly, glass funnel capacity 250 ml Not Provided Functional a) flask capacity 100ml conical flask. b) disposable filters 0.22 um 47 mm & Vacuum Pump NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Sieve Stainless Steel Not Provided Functional (a)dia 100 mm mesh 20 um. (b) 00 mm mesh 63 um. (c) 100dia mesh 125 um. (d) 100 mm dia mesh 250 um. (e) 100 mm dia mesh 500 um. (f) 100 mm dia mesh 1 mm. (g) 200 mm dia mesh 1 mm. (h) 200 mm dia mesh 500 um. (i) 200 mm dia mesh 63 um. NA 9 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Centrifuge Model EBA-20 Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Microscope Not Provided Functional Model Sm2 1000 with complete std accessories, Microscope accessories (1) P-IDT Drawing tube (2) Camera D5-5M- L 1 (3) Eye piece Reticle M (micrometer) NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Filteration Assembly (1) Filter Holder (2) Filter assembly plastic with flask 47 mm Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Phytoplankton net Hydro-Bios No. 438001 Not Provided Functional NA 2 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Top Loading Balance 5 Kg Not Provided Functional NA 2 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Water Bath fou hole (China) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Research Upright Fluorescent Microscope with Camera System and Advanced Software Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Refrigerated Microcentrifuge Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Thermal Cyclers Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Digital / Analtical Balance Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Oil Free Vacuum Pump Not Provided Functional NA 1 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Gel Electrophoresis System with Power Supply Not Provided NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Digital Balance Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Vortex Mixer Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A DAVIS - Automatic Weather Station with software Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A BENCH Top UV Transilluminator Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A BENCH Top pH METER Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Vacuum Pump Filteration Assembly Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Filtration assembly with accessories Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A PVC/Stainless manifold 3 place with accessories and vacuum pump Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A pH/DO/Temp meter for the field Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A GPS hand held with SD card latest version Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Single Point Current Meter(Sea guard Aandera) Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Thermal Camera, Testo Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A Deep Vision De340 Side Scan Sonar System Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A MIDAS Surveyor GPS Echosounder Not Provided Functional NA 1 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A YSI- Professional multiparameter water quality sonde Not Provided Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Analytical Balance NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Dirctor (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Hot Air Ovn (Furnace) NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A UV Spectrophotometer NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Conductivity/TDS Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A POrtable Conductivity/TDS Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Ion Selective Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Turbidity Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Temp/Humidity Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A pH Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Portable Dissolved Oxygen NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Deionization Apparatus NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A UV Light Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Total & Free Chlorine Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Autoclaves NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Fumes Hood NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Incubators NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Fecal Coliforms Water Bath NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Microscope NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Cowie PTEE Teflon Bottles NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Atomic Adsorption Spectrophotometr NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Gas Vacuum Pump NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Electronic Pipettes NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Laboratory Refrigerator NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Sampling Boxes NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Water Sampler NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Wastewater Sampler NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Vortex NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Stirrer NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Deep Freezer NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Micro Centrifuge NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Colony Counter(Hi-Grade) NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Colony Counter (General) NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Colony Counter (General) NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Soxhlet NCBI Functional NA Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com 1 Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Heating Mantle NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Velocity Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Water Level Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Water Leakage Meter NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Jar Tester NCBI Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Seepage Meter Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Infiltrometer Set Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Pressure Plate apparatus extractor Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Tension Plate Assembly Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Filter Funnels Extractor System Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Filter Funnels Extractor System Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Electric Soil Dispasson mixer Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Hydrometer Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Mechanical Shaker Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Boat Along with engine Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Ground Positioning System (GPS) Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Total Station Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Differential Ground Positioning System (GPS) Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Terameter Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Well Logge Soil Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A UV- Visible Spectrophotometer Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Colorimeter Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A pH meter Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A pH Meter Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Flame photometer Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Weight Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Conductivity Meter Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Chlorine Meter Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Turbidity Meter Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Temp & Humidity Meter Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Hot Air Oven Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Distillation System Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Analytical Balance Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A COD Apparatus Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Magnetic Stirrer and hot plate Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Total Organic Carbon Analyzer Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Microwave Digester Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Chemical Oxygen Demand Apparatus Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A BOD Measurement System Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Centrifuge Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Dissolved Oxygen Meter Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Soxhlet Extraction System Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Ultra Sonic Bath Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Muffle Furnace Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Vortex Mixer Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Rotatory Evaporator Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Gas chromatography Mass spectrometry GCMS Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Nitrogen Sample Concentrator Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Grinder Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Filteration Assembly Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Acid Fume Hood Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Global Positioning System (GPS) Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Total Station Water Quality Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Differential Ground Positioning System (GPS) GIS Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Terameter GIS Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources(PCRWR) N/A Well Logger GIS Laboratory Functional NA 1 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik Director (PMT) +92-51-9101272 ddpmtpcrwr@gmail.com Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Ball Mill Chemical Pilot Paint For grinding of ores Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A CNC Plasma Cutting Conventional Machine Shop For thick sheet cuttings Functional Haco Belgium NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Karachi) N/A Pyrogen Meter Pharmacology To measure pyrogen (a foreign substance) that causes a fever in an animal's body Functional MP-812 R-S Pan Lab S.I. NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Kjeltec System NA Functional Kjeltec System Digestion Unit Distilling Unit NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Autoclave PCSIR Skardu Labs Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Flame Photometer PCSIR Skardu Labs Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Colony Counter PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Conductivity meter PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Distillation unit PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A UV Cabinet with dual wave length 365nm and 254nm1White light PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Wrist action shaker BURRELL PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional Model 75 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Autoclave 30 liter capacity, electric operated. Auto time and pressure adjuster PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Deionizer PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Sulfur determination apparatus PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Micro Syringe Glass (10u1) (10u1) glass PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Grinding mill Stainless steel body PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Sachet Packing Machine PCSIR Skardu Lab Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Dead Weight Tester NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment related to pressure metrology Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Hydraulic Dead Weight Tester NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment related to pressure metrology Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Skardu) N/A Digital Pressure Indicator (Reference Gauge) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment related to pressure metrology Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Pneumatic Calibrator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment related to pressure metrology Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Reference Barometer NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment related to pressure metrology Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Precision Barometer NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment related to pressure metrology Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Electronic Dead Weight Tester NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment related to pressure metrology Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Analytical Mass Comparator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of standard and extend the traceability to the customer Functional Analytical Mass Comparator AX 1006 Mettler Toledo, Switzerland Capacity: 1000 g, Readability:1 ug NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Mass Comparator CCE6 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of standard and extend the traceabilityto the customer Functional Mass Comparator CCE6, Sartorius, Germany Capacity: 6.1 g, Readability: 0.1 ug NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Mass Comparator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of standard mass and extend the traceability to the customer Functional Capacity: I 11 g, Readability: 1 ug NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Mass Comparator CC 10000 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of standard massand extend the traceability to the customer Functional Mass Comparator CC 10000 U-L Sartorius, Germany Capacity: 10 Kg, Readability: 10 ug NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Mass Comparator CC5000 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of standard mass and extend the traceability to the customer Functional Mass Comparator CC5000 S-L Sartorius, Germany Capacity: 50 Kg, Readability: 1 mg NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Mass Comparator ME 414 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of Volume measures Standards for customer Functional Mass Comparator ME 414 S, Sartorius, Germany Capacity: 410 g, Readability: 0.1 mg NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Mass Comparator CC 64K NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of volume Measure Standards for customer Functional Mass Comparator CC 64K, Sartorius, Germany Capacity: 64 Kg, Readability: 50 mg NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Prototype Kilogram (NPK-107) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Dissemination of traceability Functional Prototype Kilogram (NPK-107) NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Cesium Beam Frequency Std NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintain international traceability Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Cesium Beam Frequency Std. NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintain international traceability Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Rubidium Frequency Std. NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintain national traceability Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A NIP Server (Secondary standard) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintain national traceability Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Counter (Agilent) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of customer's equipment Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Frequency Counter 10Hz to 40 GI-lz NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of customer's equipment Functional Frequency Counter 10Hz to 40 GI-lz NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Frequency Generator 10 Hz to 2.2 GHz NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of customer's equipment Functional Frequency Generator 10 Hz to 2.2 GHz NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Frequency Generator 10 Hz to 40 GHz NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of customer's equipment Functional Frequency Generator 10 Hz to 40 GHz NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Oscilloscope (Digital) 650 MHz NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of customer's equipment Functional Oscilloscope (Digital) 650 MHz NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Spectrum Analyzer I KHz to 40 GHz NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of customer's equipment Functional Spectrum Analyzer I KHz to 40 GHz NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Power Meter NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of power sensors Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Audio Analyzer NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of sound level Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Electronic DC Voltage Ref. Std. S.#: 2790002 Model & Make 731-B, Fluke, USA NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Electronic DC Voltage Ref. Std. S.#: 2790002 Model & Make 731-B, Fluke, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Multimeter Fluke NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Digital Multimeter Fluke 75) S.#: 3025036 Model & Make Fluke 7 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A A Set of 4-Terminal Standard Resistor NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional A Set of 4-Terminal Standard Resistor (0.0001 a to io kn) Model & Make WLN 10, H&B NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Decade Resistance Box NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Decade Resistance Box S.#: 079762 Model & Make RD-6A-1, A1OP NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Multimeter NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Digital Multimeter S.4: 3416-A-22623 Model & Make 34401-Agilent, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A AC/DC Current Shunt NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional AC/DC Current Shunt S.#: 6515003 Model & Make 5020-Y, Fluke, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Decade Resistance Box S.#: 079762 Model & Make RD-6A-1, A1OP NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Decade Resistance Box S.#: 079762 Model & Make RD-6A-1, A1OP NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A 71/2 Digit nV / uS2 Meter NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional 71/2 Digit nV / uS2 Meter S.#: US- 36002969 Model & Make 34420-Agilent, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A High Voltage Measuring Resistance NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional High Voltage Measuring Resistance Model & Make 5573 A, H-Tinselly NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A High Voltage Measuring Resistance Model & Make 5573 A, H-Tinselly NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional High Voltage Measuring Resistance Model & Make 5573 A, H-Tinselly NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A High Voltage Measuring Resistance NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional High Voltage Measuring Resistance Model & Make 5573 A, H-Tinselly NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A A Set of 2-Terminal Standard Resistor NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional A Set of 2-Terminal Standard Resistor 0.10 to 100 Mil Model & Make NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Universal Calibration System NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Universal Calibration System S.#: 44003 Model & Make 9100-Wavetek, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A AC Shunt NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional AC Shunt 10 Id) / 10 W Model & Make 7320, Guildline NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A A Set of Standard Air Capacitor NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Functional A Set of Standard Air Capacitor 0.1 ptF to 10pF Model & Make 1403-K, GR, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A A Set of Standard Self Inductor NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional A Set of Standard Self Inductor S.#: 146082 Model & Make RS 102, ANDO, Japan NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A A Set of Standard Self Inductor NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional A Set of Standard Self Inductor S.#: 146082 Model & Make RS 102, ANDO, Japan NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A AC/DC Power Supply NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional AC/DC Power Supply and load Model & Make SLH300-18-1800M, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A AC/DC Voltage Divider Model & Make DVT-150, HVI USA NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional AC/DC Voltage Divider Model & Make DVT-150, HVI USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Standard Resistor NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Standard Resistor GC2 S.#: 63 234 Model & Make 9334-1Gil, Guildline NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A DC Current Shunt NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional DC Current Shunt S.#: 66188, 0.0003330 --- 10000 SI / 300 A --- 0.00001 A Model & Make 921I-A, Guildline NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Null Detector NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Digital Null Detector S.#: 0912793 Model & Make 2182-Keithely, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A 8 1/2 Digit Multimeter Model & Make 3458-A, Agilent, USA NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional 8 1/2 Digit Multimeter Model & Make 3458-A, Agilent, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A 6'/2 Digit LCR Meter S.#: PO 9085041 Model & Make PM 6306, Fluke NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional 6'/2 Digit LCR Meter S.#: PO 9085041 Model & Make PM 6306, Fluke NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Multifunction Calibrator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Multifunction Calibrator S.#: 9797205 Model & Make 5720-A, Fluke NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Precision Power Amplifier NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Precision Power Amplifier S.#: 9798003 Model & Make 5725-A, Fluke NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Temperature / Humidity Meter NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Temperature / Humidity Meter S.No. 140102724 Model & Make HH-311, OMEGAETTE NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A 8 1/2 Digit Reference Multimeter NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment 8 1/2 Digit Reference Multimeter S.No. 331470410 Model & Make 8508-A/01- 210, Fluke NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A 4-Cell DC Voltage Reference Standard Set of 04 cell NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional 4-Cell DC Voltage Reference Standard Set of 04 cell Model & Make 734-A/40- 240, Fluke NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Transformer Turns Ratio Test Set, Transformer Auditor NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Transformer Turns Ratio Test Set, Transformer Auditor Model & Make TX- 21 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A High Voltage Probe NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Model & Make 80- K-40 HV, Fluke NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Insulation Continuity Tester NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Digital Insulation Continuity Tester (Japan) S.#: 0474697, Model & Make 4105 A, Kyuritsu NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Insulation Tester NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Digital Insulation Tester (Taiwan) S.#: 8935379, Model & Make 1851 IN, SEW NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Power Analyzer NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Digital Power Analyzer NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Insulation Tester (Megger) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Digital Insulation Tester (Megger), Model & Make 3005-A, Kyoritsu, Japan NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Electrical Power Calibrator with 80A Option 160501-R/IBEX NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Electrical Power Calibrator with 80A Option 160501-R/IBEX, Model & Make 6105A/80A NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Three Phase Power Test Equipment NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Three Phase Power Test Equipment, (Relay / Universal Test System, Sr. No.1602995, Model & Make PRFJA-300 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Dielectric Insulation Oil Tester NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Dielectric Insulation Oil Tester 200/99223010, Model & Make DTA 100C Australia NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Three Phase Network Analyzer / Tester NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Three Phase Network Analyzer / Tester TE-30, Model & Make Calmet TE-30, Poland NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Three Phase Comparator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Three Phase Comparator, Model & Make Zeera Germany Corn 5003 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Three Phase /Voltage Source NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Three Phase /Voltage Source, Model & Make Zeera Germany MT-551 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Three Phase Reference Meter NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Model & Make Zeera Germany Mt-3000 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Three Phase Power Analyzer PA 2203A NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD To maintained the traceability of electrical equipment Functional Model & Make Integra Vision, USA 2203A NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Thermocouple NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of client thermocouples Functional Thermocouple, R-Type, 2J13 K-Type, Model 2F05 E-Type 2H19 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Water Triple Point Cell NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Use for traceability of Ref. Stds Functional Water Triple Point Cell NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Digital Thermometer NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional Digital Thermometer Model YEW-2572 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A High Precision Thermostatic NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional High Precision Thermostatic Oil Bath. Pro labo 99992 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Ultra Low Temperature Bath NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional Model Heart Scientific 7380 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Liquid In Glass Thermometer NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional Liquid In Glass Thermometer NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Zero Point Dry Well, NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional Model 9101 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A RH Generator Humilab NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional RH Generator Humilab NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A RTE Bath/ Circulator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional RTE Bath/ Circulator NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Humidity and Temperature NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional Probe Model HMP75 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A R-Type Thermocouple NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional R-Type Thermocouple NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A S-Type Thermocouple NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional S-Type Thermocouple NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Black Stack Digital Readout NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Use for onsite calibration of equipment Functional Black Stack Digital Readout NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Resistance Thermometer PT 100 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Use for onsite calibration of equipment Functional Resistance Thermometer PT 100 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Dry Block Calibrator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional Dry Block Calibrator Model Gemini 700 LRI NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Triple Point of Water Maintenance Bath NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of Ref. Stds. Functional Triple Point of Water Maintenance Bath Model 7312 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Water Triple Point NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Water Triple Point Model 5901D-Q Functional Water Triple Point Model 5901D-Q NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Freezing Point of Furnace NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of Ref. Stds. Functional Freezing Point of Furnace Model 9114 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Freezing Point of Indium NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of Ref. Stds. Functional Freezing Point of Indium Model 5904 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Gallium Maintenance Apparatus NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of Ref. Stds Functional Gallium Maintenance Apparatus Model 5943 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Zinc Freezing Point Cell NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of Ref. Stds. Functional Zinc Freezing Point Cell NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A SPRT NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Use for calibration of Ref. Stds Functional SPRT Model, 5698, 5684 and 5685 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Micro K Precision Thermometry Bridge NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Micro K Precision Thermometry Bridge NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Temperature / Pressure Calibrator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Temperature / Pressure Calibrator Model 525B NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Working Standard NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Working Standard PRT Model 5628 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Working Standard PRT NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Working Standard PRT Model 5628 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A S-Type Thermocouple NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional S-Type Thermocouple Model 5650 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Thermocouple Furnace NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of equipment Functional Thermocouple Furnace Model 9112B NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Humidity Temperature Meter Model RS 1364 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Use for ref standards for calibration Functional Humidity Temperature Meter NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A RH/Temperature Meter OMEGA IDTS72 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Use for ref standards for calibration Functional RH/Temperature Meter OMEGA IDTS72 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A RH/Temperature Meter OMEGA NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Use for ref standards for calibration Functional RH/Temperature Meter OMEGA IDTS72-A NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A PRT NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Use for ref standards for calibration Functional Model 5628 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Aluminum Freeze Point Cell NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Aluminum Freeze Point Cell NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Temperature and Pressure Calibrator (525B) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Temperature and Pressure Calibrator (525B) NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Three Zone Furnace NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Three Zone Furnace NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Silver Fixed Point Cell (Isotech) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Silver Fixed Point Cell (Isotech) NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Copper Fixed Point Cell(Isotech) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Copper Fixed Point Cell(Isotech) NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Fluidized Calibration Bath (Isotech) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Fluidized Calibration Bath (Isotech) NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Mercury Fixed Point Cell (Isotech) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration of in-house equipment Functional Mercury Fixed Point Cell (Isotech) NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Universal Measuring Machine NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration and traceability of equipment Functional Universal Measuring Machine ID # UMM-I NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Working Std Meter NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration and traceability of equipment Functional Working Std Meter ID # DS-18 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Set of Angle Gauge NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration and traceability of equipment Functional Set of Angle Gauge Block ID # AGB-15 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Gauge Block Comparator Militron NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration and traceability of equipment Functional Gauge Block Comparator Militron 1240 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Length Comparator ID # DS-07 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration and traceability of equipment Functional Length Comparator NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Double Image Comparator NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration and traceability of equipment Functional Double Image Comparator ID # DS-05 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Reference Standard Meter NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Calibration and traceability of equipment Functional Reference Standard Meter ID # DS-04 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Particle Size Analyzer NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Particle Size Analyzer (Master Sizer 3000) Functional Particle Size Analyzer (Master Sizer 3000) NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Elemental Analyzer (CHNS/O) NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Analysis of CHNS in coal, steel, alloys and soil etc Functional Elemental Analyzer (CHNS/O) NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A High Pressure Liquid Chromatograph, Agilent NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Analysis of vitamins, cholesterol, aflatoxin etc Functional High Pressure Liquid Chromatography, Agilent NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Polarograph NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Trace metals like Pb, Cd, Zn, Cu, As etc Functional Polarograph NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A UV/visible Spectrophotometer NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Sulphate, nitrate, color determination Functional UV/visible Spectrophotometer NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer, AAnalyst 100, Perkin Elmer, USA NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Trace/ toxic metals in different matrices such as water, soil, food, rock and minerals etc Functional Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer, AAnalyst 100, Perkin Elmer, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A ICP-MS, Agilent 7900 NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Trace/ toxic metals in different matrices such as water, soil, food, rock and minerals etc and for CRM Functional ICP-MS, Agilent 7900 NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A XRF Spectrophotometer, Panalytical Ztium NATIONAL PHYSICAL & STANDARD LABORATORY, ISLAMABAD Analysis of Oxides such as Al, Si, Mg, Ca, Sr, Fe, Cu etc in rock and minerals Functional XRF Spectrophotometer, Panalytical Ztium NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Atomic Abosorption Spectrophotometer FTC Metals analysis of Minerals, ores, water & food/ Flame technique Metals analysis of Minerals, ores, water & food, /Flame, hydride and Electro thermal technique Functional i) 2380 Perklin Elemer, USA ii) Flame attachment iii) M3 Series Thermo Electron Scientific, UK iv) Flame, Hydride generator & Graphite furnace NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Air lift ferrnenter FTC For growth of microorgnisms Functional Fermac 360, Capacity 10 lit. Electrolab, UK NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Biological Metallurgical Microscope FTC Microscopic studies of ores, minerals and microorganisms Functional Olympus BH-2 Germany NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Flame Photometer FTC PFP7 UK Na 8c K filters Unfunctional PFP7 UK Na 8c K filters NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Fibertec System FTC Fat analysis of foods, fruits Functional Sweden NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Heating Furnace FTC Gravimetric analysis of Minerals, ores and food Functional K1251 Germany NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A High speed Centrifuge machine FTC Separation of insoluble materials from liquids Functional Z323 USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A HPLC FTC Biochemical analysis of foods Functional Gradientent system F-10 AXL, with UV-Vis, RID & Flurescence detectors, Schimadzu, JapaN NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Incubator shaker FTC Cultivation of microorganism Functional THL-500. UK NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Laminar Flow Cabinet FTC i) Safety cabinet for microorganisms handling Functional i) Laminar Flow Cabinet ii) NUVE, LN 090 Horizontal Type, Turkey NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Mixing Tank FTC Chemical preparation Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Rotatory Shaker FTC Cultivation of microorganism Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A UV-Vis Spectrophotometer FTC Colorimetric Analysis of metals and biochemicals Colorimetric Analysis of metals and biochemicals Functional i) U- 2000 Hitaci, Japan ii) UV and Visible range iii) UV pharmaspec 1700, Schimadzu Japan iv) UV and Visible range NA 2 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Soxtec-system FTC Fat analysis of foods, fruits Functional Sweden NA 1 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Stirred Fermenter FTC Bio G-Micom, Biotron, Korea, Capacity 5 lit. Functional Bio G-Micom, Biotron, Korea, Capacity 5 lit. NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Steam Jacketed 16. Reaction Vessel FTC Chemical preparation Functional NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Bomb- Calorimeter MTC Calorific value of Fuels Functional C-4000 IKA W. Germany NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Disc Mill MTC Sample preparation of ores, minerals for R&D, and Testing analysis Functional Sew Eurodrive Germany NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Floatation Machine MTC Ores beneficiation Functional D12 England NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Grinder- Polisher MTC Ores surface preparation for microscopic studies Functional GRIP02 Turkey NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Heating Furnace MTC Gravimetric analysis of Minerals, ores and food Functional K1251 Germany NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Jaw Crusher MTC Sample preparation of ores, minerals for R&D, and Testing analysis Functional Qaiser Scientific, Pakistan NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Mounting press MTC Ores surface preparation for microscopic studies Functional Met kon Turkey NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Roll Crusher MTC Sample preparation of ores, minerals for R&D, and Testing analysis Functional Qaiser Scientific, Pakistan NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Rock Cutting machine MTC For ore and mineral identinfication Functional UK NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Shaking Table MTC Beatification of ores and minerals (gravity base) Functional W-DA7I5K UK Wilfiey, USA NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Islamabad ) N/A Vibrate CUP Mill MTC Sample preparation of ores, minerals for R&D, and Testing analysis Functional W. 6580 Fritsch Germany NA 1 Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Quetta) N/A Wet Magnetic Separator MTC Beatification of magnetic ores and minerals Functional WS201 Blue NA 1 Institute of Agricultural Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore N/A Refrigerator NA Functional NA NA Institute of Agricultural Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore N/A Laminar Flow Hood NA Functional NA NA University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Spectophotometer Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Freeze Draying Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Water Bath Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A PH Meter Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Weighing Balance Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Centrifuge Machine Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Compound Microscope Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Compound Microscope Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Micro Oven Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A P.C.R. Machine (Thermo Cycle) Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Refrigerated Centrifuge Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Microscope Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Analytical Balance Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A U.V Illuminator Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Blender Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Laminar Flow Cabinet Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Vortex Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Drying Oven Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Sohxlet apparatus Complete assembly with all Accessories Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Plant Growth Chamber Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Plant Growth Chamber Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Plant Growth Chamber Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Hot Plate and Magnetic Stirrer Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Analytical Balance Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47 Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Liquid Nitrogen Container Thermo Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gel Electrophoreses Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A SDS PAGE Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Shaking Incubator Mini Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Aloe Vera Processing unit with Vacuum Pump Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Oil Press Unit Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Essential Oil Unit Extraction (Small) Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Scale Balance Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Beam Balance (Kg) Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Sohxlet Apparatus with Accessories Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Pulper Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Muffle Furner Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Florescent & Digital Microscope Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Stereo Microscope Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Grinder Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Display Refrigerator Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Histopathology System Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Electronic Balance Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Hot Oven Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Incubator Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Auto Clave Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Distillation Unit Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Laminar Flow Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gel Electrophoreses Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Centrifuge (Falcon 50 ML) Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Centrifuge Refrigerator (15/50 ML) Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Vortex Mixer Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Colony Counter Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Centrifuge Regrigerator Eppondoff Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Shaking Incubator (Temp Controlled) Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A (-08) Display Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A H.P.L.C with Accessories Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A UV Laminator L 50 Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A (-20) Refrigerator Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A ELISA Reader and Washer with Printer Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A UV/VIS Spectrophotometer Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Dray Bath Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Centrifuge Ependoff Helment Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Cabinet Incubator 37c Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Plant Growth Chamber Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Dehumidifying Chamber Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Hybergene Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A ICE Machine Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Display Cool Refrigerator Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Recipro Cating (orbital) Shake Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gene Gun Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A ELISA Reader and Washer Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Digital Incubator Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Laminar Air Flow Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR, Leather Research Center, Karachi) N/A Incubator Hot Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Orbital Shaker Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A U-V Light Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gel Doc System Institute of Agricultural Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tehmina Anjum, Contact: 92-42-99231846-47, Email: director.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Scanning Electron Microscopy Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Surface topography Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Energy Dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX attached with SEM) Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Elemental Micro Analysis Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Atomic force microscopy (NT-MDT) Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Contact mode, semi contact mode analysis of nanoparticles, coatings, etc Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A universal testing machine (300KN and 10KN, 1 KN, load cell capacity) Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Tensile test, compression, bend, adhesion and shear tests of metals, plastics, ceramics, etc Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Impact testing Metallurgy and Materials Engineering lzod and charpy test for plastics, charpy test for metals Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Thermal contact resistance measurment apparatus Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Thermal conductivity of insulating materials, polymers, thermally conducting adhesives, etc Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Multimeter and Milliohmeter Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Electrical conductivity of filled polymers/composites Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Universal Sand Strength Testing Machine Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Texting of Shear & Compression Strength of Moulding Sand Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Moisture Teller Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Moisture content of materials Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Permeability Tester Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Permeability test of materials Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Sieve Shaker Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Particle Size Analysis Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Shatter Index Tester Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Shatter index of molding sand Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Hardness tester Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Mould Core hardness test Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A UV spectrophotometer (can be used with potentiostat) Metallurgy and Materials Engineering UV spectrometer Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A potentiostat/Galvanostat/ZRA (Gamry instruments, USA) Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Electro Chemical Techniques (Corrosion testing of metals, coatings etc) Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Surface Profilometer Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Surface roughness Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Optical Microscope (Lieca) Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Digital imaging with speciment preparation Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Rockwell Hardness Tester Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Hardness testing of metals and alloys Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Muffle Furnace Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Heat-treatment Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Crucible Furnace Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Salt Bath Heat treatment Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Carbolite Furnace Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Heat treatment of Large Samples Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Micro-Vicker Hardness Tester Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Hardness testing of metals and alloys Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam 92-42-99232004 asalam.ceet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Leica Optical Microscope Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Surface study at micro level Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Carl Zeiss Scanning Electron Microscope Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Surface topography Functional NA NA "Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Veeco Scanning Probe Microscope Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Surface study at atomic level Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Lakeshore Vibrating Sample Magnetometer Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Magnetic Properties Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A JA Woolam Specctroscopic Ellipsometer Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Optical Properties Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Shimadzu Universal Testing Machine Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Mechanical Properties Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Shimadzu Vickers Hardness Tester Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Mechanical Properties Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Bruker XRD Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Materials Identification Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Weinkerr Impedence Spectroscopy Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Impedence & Capacitance Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Kiethly Semiconductor Characterization System & Microprober Center of Excellence in Solid State Physics Electrical Properties Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Shahzad Naseem 92-42-99233133-5 director.cssp@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Atomic Absorption Institute of Chemistry Analysis of Metals at PPM levels Functional NA NA Dr. Muhammad Abdul Qadir 92-42-99230463 chemistrypu@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A eliza Institute of Chemistry Hoormones/Antibodies Functional NA NA Dr. Muhammad Abdul Qadir 92-42-99230463 chemistrypu@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gas Chromatography (GCMS) Institute of Chemistry Analysis of Volatile Components Functional NA NA Dr. Muhammad Abdul Qadir 92-42-99230463 chemistrypu@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) Institute of Chemistry Pesticides/Pharmaceutics/Vitamins etc. Functional NA NA Dr. Muhammad Abdul Qadir 92-42-99230463 chemistrypu@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Bomb Calorimeter Institute of Chemistry Heat of Combustion Functional NA NA Dr. Muhammad Abdul Qadir 92-42-99230463 chemistrypu@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A FTIR Institute of Chemistry Functional Groups Functional NA NA Dr. Muhammad Abdul Qadir 92-42-99230463 chemistrypu@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A UV/Vis Spectrophotometer Institute of Chemistry Basic spectrometry of Inorganic and Organic Compunds Functional NA NA Dr. Muhammad Abdul Qadir 92-42-99230463 chemistrypu@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Flame Photometer Institute of Chemistry Sodium and Potassium in aqueous samples Functional NA NA Dr. Muhammad Abdul Qadir 92-42-99230463 chemistrypu@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Metal analysis (cr, As, Se, Hg) Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Spectrophotometer Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Auxin assay Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A HPLC Microbiology & Molecular Genetics HPLC/UV Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A HPLC ( HPLC/RI, Phosphate) Microbiology & Molecular Genetics HPLC/RI, Phosphate Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Fermentor Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Fermentation Facility Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A EC Meter Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Electrical Conductivity Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Lypholizer Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Lypholization assay Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Distiller Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Distilled water 2.5 lit Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Deionizer Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Deionizer water 2 lit Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Rotary evaporator Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Solvent evaporation assay Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A 96 well Microplate Reader Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Biofilm analysis of bacteria on microplate reader Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A 12 well Microplate Reader Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Biofilm analysis of bacteria on microplate reade Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Lumino Meter Microbiology & Molecular Genetics Biofilm formation by lumunious production,Qualitative test Quantitative test, Light microscopy, Cyanobacteria culturing, Microalgae culturing Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Sikander Sultan 92-42-35952811 chairperson.mmg@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A High Performance Liquid chromatography (HPLC) School of Physical Sciences Purity testing of Compounds Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Farah Kanwal 92-42-99230234 dg.sps@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gas Chromatography (GC) School of Physical Sciences Purity testing of Compounds Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Farah Kanwal 92-42-99230234 dg.sps@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Carbon-Hydrogen-Nitrogen-Sulfur (CHNS) elemental analyzer School of Physical Sciences Purity testing of Compounds Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Farah Kanwal 92-42-99230234 dg.sps@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A UV/Vis Spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer LAMBDA-25) Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Analysis by determination of radiation absorbed/ emitted by a coloured liquid sample in UV/Visible region Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A High Pressure Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) (Perkin Elmer) Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Analysis by component separation using packed columns Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gas Chromatography (Varian CP-3800) Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Analysis by Separation of Components using capillary columns. Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Rheometer (Rheotec RC-20) Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Analysis of Viscosity, Shear Rate, Shear Stress using rotational tests with controlled shear rate and controlled shear stress (CSR and CSS) Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Volumetric Karl Fischer Titration Workstation (Timtitra 580 titration manager) Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Titrimetric and Water content analysis Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Redwood I, II Viscometers Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Viscosity Unfunctional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Pensley Martin Flash Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Flash Point Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Density Meter Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Density Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Atomic Absorption Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Heavy Metals Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gass Chromatography Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology Analysis Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Abdullah Khan Durrani 92-42-99230462 akdurani.icet@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Fish Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Gene Integration, Karyotyping Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Northern Blotting Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Northern Boltting Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Elisa Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Plan Elisa Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Irga Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Photosynthetic Rate Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Sonication Sonication Sonication Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Genetic Modification Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Transformation Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A HPLC Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Reverse Phase HPLC Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Acta-100 Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Protein Purification Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Bio-Assay Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Bioassay Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Antibody Generation In Animal Model Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology Antibody generation Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Tayyab Husnain 92-42-35293137 director@cemb.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Mass Spectrophotometer School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A HPLC System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A FPLC System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Centrifuge High Speed School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Real Time PCR School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A 2D Gel Electrophoresis with Gel Electrophoresis System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gel Documentation System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Analyser for Culture Component School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Biolistic Gun School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Fermenter School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Ultra Cold Freezer School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Refrigerated Orbital Shaking Incubator School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A FPLC System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Sequencer School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Proteome Lab School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Scintillation Counter School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Atomic Absorption School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Elisa Reader School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Plant Growth Chamber School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A French Press School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Vacuum Pump School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A CO2 Incubator School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Sonicator or Ultra Sonic Bath School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Concentrator School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Scanning Spectrophotometer UV/VIS School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Shimadzu UV-1700 Bio Spectrophotometer System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A CD Spectrophotometer Included: Chiller, Computer P4 with Monitor School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Visible Spectrophotometer School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A UV/VIS Spectrophotometer School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Electroporator Gene Pulser System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A PCR Machine School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Hybridization Oven School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A High Speed Cetrifuge School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Ice Making Machine School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Water Purification System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Water Bath School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Biosafety Cabinets Biosafety Cabinets Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Flow Cytometer School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Pipetmax 96 Channels School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Magpix System School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Automated Cell Counter School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Automated Tissue Processor School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Fluorescence microscope School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Flow Cytometer Flow Cytometer Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Ultra sonic Processor School of Biological Sciences Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Naeem Rashid 92-42-99230960 info@sbs.pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Atomic aborption spectrophotometer Zoology Categorization of coliform/Total Coliform Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Javed Iqbal Qazi 92-42-99231246 chairman.zool@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Microbiological Zoology Categorization of coliform/Total Coliform Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Javed Iqbal Qazi 92-42-99231246 chairman.zool@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Environmental Samples Zoology Categorization of coliform Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Javed Iqbal Qazi 92-42-99231246 chairman.zool@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Designing, bioremediatin of industrial effects Zoology Will depend on nature of material Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Javed Iqbal Qazi 92-42-99231246 chairman.zool@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Cell and tissue histological morphontary Zoology Cell morphontary/Quantigication of Revascularization Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Javed Iqbal Qazi 92-42-99231246 chairman.zool@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A PCR Zoology Gene amphfication/Gene Expression Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Javed Iqbal Qazi 92-42-99231246 chairman.zool@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gel Zoology Gel electrophoresis Functional NA NA Prof. Dr. Javed Iqbal Qazi 92-42-99231246 chairman.zool@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A EEG / EMG/ ECG Machine Centre for Clinical Psychology EEG & ECG used to record electrical activity of the brain and heart, respectively Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Stress Meter Centre for Clinical Psychology It allows to measure the stress level Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Luria- Nebraska Centre for Clinical Psychology Neuropsychological Test Battery Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Halstead Retain Battery Centre for Clinical Psychology Neuropsychological Test Battery Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Halstead Retain Battery Centre for Clinical Psychology Neuropsychological Test Battery Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Memory for Design Test Centre for Clinical Psychology Memory Test Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Good enough Harris Drawing Test Centre for Clinical Psychology Personality for Children IQ Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A social Skills Training With children and Adolescents Centre for Clinical Psychology Social Skills Training Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Examining of Aphasia Centre for Clinical Psychology Aphasia Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Cognitive Abilities Test Centre for Clinical Psychology Cognitive Abilities Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Bruininks Oseretsky Test of Motor Proficient Centre for Clinical Psychology (Children)Work Functioning Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Golsten-Scheerer Cube Test Centre for Clinical Psychology Neuropsychological Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Bender GestaTt Test (B.G.T Centre for Clinical Psychology Neuropsychological Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A TAT, CAT AND SAT BOOK Centre for Clinical Psychology Personality Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Arthur Point Scale of Personality Test Centre for Clinical Psychology Personality Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Bayley scales of Infant Development Centre for Clinical Psychology Adaptive Functioning Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Benton Visual Retention Test 4 Edition Centre for Clinical Psychology Neuropsychological Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Benton Visual Retention Test (BVRT) 5th Edition. Centre for Clinical Psychology Neuropsychological Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Carlson Psychological Survey Centre for Clinical Psychology For assessment of convict of criminal offenses Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Children Apperception Test (C.A.T) Centre for Clinical Psychology Personality Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Edwards Personal Preference Schedule Centre for Clinical Psychology Personality Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A General Health Questionnaire Centre for Clinical Psychology General Health Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Kendrick Battery Test Centre for Clinical Psychology Dementia Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Personal Questionnaire Rapid Scaling Technique Centre for Clinical Psychology Personal feelings and thoughts Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Quick Neurological Screening Test (Q.N.S.T) Centre for Clinical Psychology Neuropsychological Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Rotter Incomplete Sentences Blank (R.I.S.B). Centre for Clinical Psychology Personality / Adjustment Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Rorschach Technique Tests Centre for Clinical Psychology Personality Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A WISC Complete Centre for Clinical Psychology lQTest Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A WAIS Complete Centre for Clinical Psychology lQTest Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Mooney Problem Checklist Centre for Clinical Psychology Personal Problems Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Ravens Progressive Matrices Centre for Clinical Psychology Cognitive Ability Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM) Centre for Clinical Psychology Cognitive Ability Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Coloured Progressive Matrices (C.P.M) Centre for Clinical Psychology Cognitive Ability Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Advance Progressive Matrices(APM) Centre for Clinical Psychology Cognitive Ability Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Picture Test "A. Centre for Clinical Psychology Non-verbal ability Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Non Verbal Test DH Centre for Clinical Psychology (ChiIdren)Non-verbal ability Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Behavior Assessment Battery Centre for Clinical Psychology Behavior Assessment of individuals & handicaps Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.p University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Self Esteem Scale Centre for Clinical Psychology Self Esteem Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Study Habits and attitudes of Students Centre for Clinical Psychology Habits and Attitudes Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A WAIC-R Centre for Clinical Psychology IQ Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A WAIS-R Centre for Clinical Psychology IQ Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Wood Cock Johnson Centre for Clinical Psychology Achievement Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Suicidal Ideation Questionnaire Centre for Clinical Psychology Suicidal ldeation Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Draw a person (D.A.P) Centre for Clinical Psychology Personality Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Visual Motor Integration Test(VMI) Centre for Clinical Psychology Visual Motor Coordinator Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Brown Attention Deficit Disorder Scale Centre for Clinical Psychology Attention Deficit Disorder Functional NA NA Dr. Saima Dawood 92-42-99230533 info.ccpsy@pu.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 1 Dr. Raja A., II Sa raz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture, Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A High Performance Liquid - Chromatograph Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Sa raz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Gas Chromatograph Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Sa raz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Ultracentrifuge/ Centrifuge (up to 65000 rpm) Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Sarfaraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Lyophilizer Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Safaraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A UVNisible Spectrophotometer Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Kjeldhal Extraction System Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Osmometer Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Conductivity Meter/pH Meter Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., II Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A DO meter Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Refractometer Central H-Tech Lab Functional 1 NA Dr. Raja A., Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Camera Fitted Microscope Central H-Tech Lab Functional 100 NA Dr. Raja A Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Muffle Furnace Central H-Tech Lab Functional 100 NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Vibrating Cup Mill Central H-Tech Lab Functional 100 NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Weighing Balance Central H-Tech Lab Functional 100 NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Ultrasonic Bath Central H-Tech Lab Functional 100 NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Water Bath Central H-Tech Lab Functional 100 NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Magnetic Stirrer Central H-Tech Lab Functional 100 NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Rotary Shaker Central H-Tech Lab Functional 100 NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Central H-Tech Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatograph Central H-Tech Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Gas Chromatograph Central H-Tech Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD) Central H-Tech Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Scanning Electron Microscope Central H-Tech Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A UV-Vis Spectrophotometer Central H-Tech Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Kjeldal's Apparatus Central H-Tech Lab Unfunctional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Lyophilizer Central H-Tech Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Light Microscopes Central H-Tech Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Raja AdiI Sarfraz Officer lncharge Central H-Tech Lab. University of Agriculture Faisalabad Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad, Islamabad(AIOU) N/A XRD AIOU Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Syed Zafar Illyas, Dean Faculty of Sciences, AIOU, Islamabad Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad, Islamabad(AIOU) N/A LUMOS FTIR Microscopy AIOU Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Syed Zafar Illyas, Dean, Faculty of Science, AIOU Islamabad Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad, Islamabad(AIOU) N/A FTIR AIOU Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Syed Zafar Illyas, Dean, Faulty of Science, AIOU, Islamabad University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A XRF AIOU Lab Functional NA NA Dr. Syed Zafar Illyas, Dean, Faculty of Sciences, AIOU Islamabad National University of Science & Technology, Islamabad(NUST) N/A Atomic Force Microscope Atomic Force Microscopy lab Characterization of thin films, surface roughness, topology, identification of atoms 10 Functional lnnova AFM NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed, Director, NUST University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Vector Network Analyzer 100khZ-24GHz RADAR Lab Used to test various electrical and network parameters like S, Y, Z, & ABCD parameters Functional R&S (Rohde & Schwarz) ZVA24 NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed, Director, NUST National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vector Network Analyzer 100khZ-24GHz RADAR Lab Used to test various electrical and network parameters like S, Y, Z, & ABCD parameters Functional R&S (Rohde & Schwarz) ZVA24 NA NA Dr Qaiser Hameed National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF/Micro Wave Signal Generator 100KHz- 20GHz 1 RADAR Lab Used for testing components, systems in a wide variety of applications including cellular communications, WiFi, WiMAX, GPS, audio and video broadcasting, Satellite communications, Radar and Electronic Warfare Functional R&S (Rohde & Schwarz) SMB 100A NA NA Dr Qaiser Hameed, NUST, Director National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Spectrum Analyzer 9KHz - 6GHz Communication Engineering Lab Used to check and analyze signals and their frequency spectrum Functional R&S (Rohde & Schwarz) FSC 6 NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A USRP(Universal Software Radio Peripheral), Daughter Board UBX 40 & accessories) Communication Engineering Lab Functional Enus Kit N 210 NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed, Director Academics, NUST National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Field Programmable gate array kits (FPGA) Digital Electronics Lab Hardware platform for FPGA developers, Internet of Things (IoT) system designers, makers, and students to design reconfigurable systems/programmable logic Functional Atlys, Nexys 3, Spartan-6, Genesys Vertex-5 NA 25 Dr Qaiser Hameed, Director Academics, NUST National University of Science & Technology, Islamabad(NUST) N/A Supersonic Wind Tunnel ES Department Most important tool for aerodynamic research Verification of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) predictions Quantitative and qualitative flow visualization Functional M/s Cussons Tech, UK Model P3290 NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vibration Test Apparatus Mechanics Lab Utilized in machinery health monitoring and vibration testing Functional Model 2130 Machinery Analyzer NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Portable Surface Roughness Tester ES Department Used in assessment of surface roughness. Assessed profiles, load curves, and amplitude distribution curves can be displayed in addition to calculation results Functional SURFTEST S.1-210 NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Engine Test Bed HVAC Lab Engine performance curve analysis at full and partial load Engine efficiency and fuel consumption variation with speed and load Determination of engine parameters (torque, brake power, SFC, efficiency) at different speeds Functional HT-434 NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Variable Compression Ratio Petrol Engine Thermodynamics Determination of effect of varying compression ratio on engine performance Functional Te-I5 NA 1 Dr Qaiser Hameed National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hydraulic Bench MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional F1-10-A NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hydraulic Bench MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional HM-150 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Dead Weight Pressure Gauge Calibrator MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional F1-11 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Metacentric Height MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional F1-14 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hydrogen Bubble Flow Visualization System MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional F14-A NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Turbine Service Unit MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional FM3SU-A NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Axial Flow Impulse Turbine MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional FM30 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Radial Flow Reaction Turbine MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional FM31 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pelton Turbine Demo Unit MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional FM32 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Ground Water Flow / Well Abstraction Rig MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional S-11 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Series / Parallel Pump Test MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Hydraulics Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional HM-150.16 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Soil Hydrometer MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Geotech Lab Hydrometer Test Functional H152 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Distilled Water Still (CxWx H) 240x180x580 mm, Weight 5kg MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Geotech Lab Water Distillation Functional HAMILTON NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hydraulic Earth Drill (11 HP) MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Geotech Lab Drilling Functional VJTECH NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Un-Confined Compression Motorized Apparatus MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Geotech Lab UCC Test Functional Galson NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Automatic Volume Change MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Geotech Lab Triaxial Test Functional NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Electronic Lab Top Pan Balance 4100gx0.01g MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Geotech Lab Weighing Functional NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Motorized Heavy Dynamic Penetrometer MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Geotech Lab SPT Test Functional VJTECH NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Proving Ring Capacity 5KN MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Geotech Lab Load Measure Functional NA 2 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A DC Machine (1/3HP) MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Electrical Lab Used in conduction of Practical's (for Degree Classes) Functional Consulab Canada / CL-214-50 NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Polygon of Forces Apparatus MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Mechanical Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional Local NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Boyle's Law Apparatus MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Mechanical Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional GUNT NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Supercomputer (HPC Cluster) Supercomputing Lab,RCMS Functional To serve as a central repository of software to facilitate academic research of faculty and students of NUST. To estabish a center of excellence in the field of high performance computing To develop human resource in the field of high performance computing To provide broadband access of the facility to different institutions of NUST NA 1 Engr Muhammad Usman +92-51-9085-5717 usman@rcms.nust.edu.pk Phone: +92-51-9085-5717 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A CHN Element Analyzer and Infrared Sulfur Analyzer Fossil Fuel Research Lab Elemental Analyzer is used to determine carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulphur content in solid and liquid material, such as coal, coke, oil, petroleum, biomass, fertilizer, plastic, food, hydrocarbons and plant tissue, leaves and tobacco, which is widely applied in power plants, coal mines, metallurgy, chemical industry, commercial inspection, scientific research, food industry. Functional CKIC, China Model: 5E-CHN2200 & 5EIRS II NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) Tester Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE This instrement can be used to determine grind ability of coal in the field of coal industry, power plants, metallurgical industry and scientific research Functional Sunday, China Model SDHG60a NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Bench Top Pulverizer Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE Used for small sample volumes of coal particles 3/16" and smaller in order to reduce the size down to 0.016" through 1/16" Functional HOLMES Bros. Technologies, USA Model 502XLB2BS NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Sieve Shaker Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE The machine provides horizontal, circular motion and a vertical, tapping motion. This special action allows material particles to stratify and "seek" critical openings in the test media. This unit provides the most accurate and consistant particle analysis testing. This model is designed for testing with 8" diameter test sieves. Functional W.S.Tyler, USA Model RX29-10 NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Air Drying Oven Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE The Air Drying Oven provides for the partial drying of coal to bring it to near equilibrium with room temperature before further reduction and division. Oven is often used for drying float/sink samples. Functional PREISER SCIENTIFIC, USA Model Z91-2290-81 NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Indoor Air Quality Monitor Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE The instrument can be used to montor temperature, RG Barometric Pressure, CO2, CCO, O2, NO2, VOC for indoor environments. Functional E-Instruments, USA Model AQ Expert-5 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Positive and Negative Duct Accreditation (PANDA) System Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE The positive and negative duct accreditation (PANDA) system provides contractors, commissioning engineers, and research and development technicians with the best in class choice of test equipment to quantify air leakage in ductwork and other areas as eell as the aility to measure the performance of ducted systems. Functional TSL, USA Model PAN3411 Series PANDA LIGHT NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Gas Chromatograph Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE This equipment enables reliable, high-precision trace analysis with high repeatability, utilizating detectors such as FID and TCD that feature best-in-class sensitivity Functional Shimadzu, Japan Model G2010 Plus NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A FT Synthesis bench scale facility Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE For testing different catalysts that aid the conversion of syngas to liquid fuel. Functional China NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Air Audit Kit Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE The Air Audit Kit includes attachments for airborne ultrasound applications including leak detection (any type of gas), vacuum leak detection, electrical inspection and steam leak detection. Additionally, the kit includes a single 3-inch solid probe for diagnosing steam traps and valves by detecting internal by pass leaks. Functional CTRL Systems Inc USA Model UL 101 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science & Technology, Islamabad(NUST) N/A Fisheye lens Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE For evaluating the solar potential of any given area Functional Step Robotics Model FYA-1 V4 NA 12 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Four Stroke Diesel Engine MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Mechanical Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional England NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Turbo Speed Sensor Fossil Fuel Research Lab, USPCASE The KTSM series of turbo speed / temperature sensors are designed for direct installation onto the turbo casing. (Speed Range: 0-400,000 rpm) Functional KA Sensor, UK Model (KTSM2-RSS-PB05-000) & (KSIT-05-070-000) NA 5 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A TM 110 Fundamentals of Stales MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Mechanical Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional GUNT NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Four Stroke Petrol Engine MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Mechanical Lab Only For Undergraduate Classes Functional GUNT NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A HV current and Voltage Probs Smart Grid & Power Lab, USPCASE High Voltage and Large current Measurement Functional PICO NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A HV Power Supply Smart Grid & Power Lab, USPCASE High Voltage Testing Functional Stanford Research Systems NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Full Four Quadrant Amplifier 15KW Smart Grid & Power Lab, USPCASE Linear non linear load stress testing Functional Regatron NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Power Grid Simulator National Instruments, USPCASE Power hardware and loop system Functional National Instruments NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Power Quality Analyzer Smart Grid & Power Lab, USPCASE Power Quality Testing Functional National Instruments NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Chroma Electronic Load 4.5 KW Smart Grid & Power Lab, USPCASE Power Supply Testing Functional Chroma NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Micro Relay Protection System Smart Grid & Power Lab, USPCASE Protection system Testing Functional National Instruments NA 3 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Compacting Factor MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Concrete Lab Used for workability of fresh concrete Functional KBL NA 2 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vicate Needle Apparatus MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Concrete Lab Use for setting time and consistency of cement Functional KBL NA 2 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Concrete Core Cutting Machine MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Concrete Lab Used for taking concrete cores from in-situ structures Functional China NA 2 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Phasor Measurement Unit Smart Grid & Power Lab, USPCASE Synchrophasor Measurement Functional National Instruments NA 2 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Gas Chromatorgraphy and Mass Spectrometry (GCMS) Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE To indentify different shubstances present within a liquid sample Functional Shimadzu, Japan Model QP-202 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Combined Gas and Smoke Motor Vehicle Emission Analyzer Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For analyzing the emissions produced by automobiles Functional Crypton, UK Model: 700 Series NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Viscometer Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For determination of viscosities of liquids Functional Brookfield AMETEK, USA Model: DV2T-RV NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Water Analyzing pH/DO/Cond Multipurpose Meter Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For characterization of Ph, Dissolved Oxygen and electrical conductivity of water Functional WTW, Germany NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Computer Controlled Combustion Laboratory Unit Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For study and understanding of many aspects related to combustion of liquid fuels and gases, using a small scale unit with SCADA Functional EDIBON, Spain NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Infrared Camera Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE Portable device for determining the thermal image and perform temperature calculations Functional Fluke, USA Model: Ti400 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Pressure Gauge Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE Enables the measurement and display of pressure values in a single instrument Functional Fluke, USA Model: 700G Series NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High Temperature IR Thermometer Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For measuring temperature up to 1600?C with 50 to 1 distance to target ration and laser pointer that identifies target area Functional China NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Ultrasonic Thickness Gauge Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For measuring of thickness of a specimen/sheet Functional Qualitest USA Model: MX-3 Series NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Ultrasonicator Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE Probe type ultrasonicator for agitating particles in a sample i.e., preparation of nanofluids etc Functional Qsonica, USA Model: Q1375 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Data Loggers for measurement of temperature, pressure Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For recording data over time or in relation to other parameters by connecting the sensors such as thermocouples, pressure transducers, flowmeters and other instrumentation etc Functional Hangzhou Pangu Automation China Model: KT830R NA 2 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Particle Image Velocimetry Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For research and diagnostics into flow, flow visualization, turbulence, microfluids, spray atomization and combustion processes Functional Dantec Dynamis, Denmark Model: 2DPIV System NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SprayView Fuel Atomization System Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For fuel atomization Functional Turbine, Technology Ltd USA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science & Technology, Islamabad(NUST) N/A Bomb Calorimeter Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE To determine the heat content of a solid / liquid sample Functional Parr Instrument, USA Model: 6200 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Ultrahigh Speed Camera (Monochrome) Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE For recording fast-moving objects in ultra-slow motion and study of the flow in microchannel Functional Phantom, USA Model: v1212 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A X-ray diffractometer (XRD) Combined Lab It is an equiopment to extract and analyze the crystal structure and phase information of different materials Functional D8 Advance by Bruker NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Scanning electron microscope with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscope (SEM-EDS) Combined Lab, UPCASE Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) subjects a sample to a beam of accelerated electrons for microscopy imaging Functional Vega-3 LMU by Tescan NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Structure Scanner Mini 3D MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Concrete Lab Used for structure analysis of existing structure Functional NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) Combined Lab, UPCASE The system devlops a sub Nano-metrically precise topographical image of a surface based on the atomic forces experienced by a cantilever when brought closer to the sample Functional Flex-AFM by Nanosurf NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Schmidt Hammer MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Concrete Lab Used for finding compressive strength of concrete Functional ELE NA 2 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Air Entrained Meter MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Concrete Lab Used for air entrained and light weight concrete Functional Matest NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Thermal Dilatometer Combined Lab, UPCASE The relative change in length as a flunction of temperature, the coefficient of linear thermal expansion Functional DIL-801 by TA Instruments NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Impact Value MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Concrete Lab Used for finding of toughness of coarse aggregate Functional KBL NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Centrifuge Extractor MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Concrete Lab Used for extracting moisture from aggregates Functional Control NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Nadeem Iqbal +92-315-125012 nadeemiqbal2402@hotmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Analog & Digital Training System-ETS 7000 Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Combines all essential function of analog/ digital experiment with function generator, two pulse switches, 0.25W speaker etc Functional M21-7000/ 2014 NA 15 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Universal Counter Timer Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Measurement of Frequency and time Intervals Functional 2438 NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Micro Strip Trainer Model Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) It comprises of passive circuit components and active circuits to construct variety of configurations and incorporate microwave integrated circuits (MICs) Functional MST 532 NA 2 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Nintendo`s Wii Console with complete accessories Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Converts human motions into computer readable commands (Gamming) Functional Nintendo NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Microwave Educational Test Bench with accessories Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Used for variety of MW signals tests Functional 5599/2 NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vector Network Analyzer Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Enables the RF performance of radio frequency (RF) and microwave devices to be characterized in terms of network scattering parameters Functional 4 x Channels/ 10 MHZ-20GHZ NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Spectrum Analyzer (9 KHz -30MHz) Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Displays signal amplitude (strength) as it varies by signal frequency Functional 2506A 2506B NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Aeroflex Spectrum Analyzer (10KHZ to 26.5 GHz) Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Displays signal amplitude (strength) as it varies by signal frequency Functional Model 2395 NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Spectrum Analyzer Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Displays signal amplitude (strength) as it varies by signal frequency Functional GSP 810 NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Themogravimetric / Differential Thermal Analyzer (TA/DTA) Combined Lab, UPCASE Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis can be simultaneously coducted for samples up to 1500?C max Functional TGA 50/51 by Shamdzu NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Function Generator Model Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Used for Instrument Testing with waveform 0.2Hz ~ 2MHz Functional GFG 8020 NA 3 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A UV-Vis-NIR Spectrophotometer Combined Lab, UPCASE Information about the optical response, thickness estimation, electronic band structure and crystal structure of a sample can be obtained with a standard UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer Functional UV-3600 Plus by Shamdzu NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Laser Particle Size Analyzer Combined Lab, UPCASE It determines the particle size by examining the scattering / interference pattems obtained as a result of interaction between the sample in dispersion / supensio from and the incident laser light Functional BT-9300st by Betterzise NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Electron Beam Evaporation Combined Lab, UPCASE Fully automated computer controlled system with 10 KV, adjustable power supply, 1000 mA beam current. Thermal evaporation has also been integrated into the system Functional by Nanowak NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A DC & RF Magnetron Sputtering, Rreactive Sputtering & Thermal Evaporation in One Unit Combined Lab, UPCASE Fully automatic PVD unit, controlled with real time touch screen computer panel has capacity to perform not only sputtering (two magnetron sources, one RF (13.6 MHz, 300 W) and one DC source (0-1000 V DC, 2000 W) but also therma evaporation (two 2000W independent evaporation sources) Functional by Nanowak NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Frequency Counter Model Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Test Equipment of 1 HZ to 120 MHz Range Functional GFC-8010H NA 10 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Multimeter Model Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Measurement of voltage, current & resistance Functional GDM-356 NA 10 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Exchange Trainer Model B4622 with Digital Telephone Exchange for Digital Switching Technique Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) An exchange with subscriber telephone set implemented in training version uses, have integrated pulse/tone dialer, active hybrid, electronic ringer, dialing keypad Functional B4622 NA 4 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hall Effect Measurement System Combined Lab, UPCASE Analytical surface morphology Functional MTI Corporation USA NA 2 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Function/Arbitrary Waveform Generator Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Creates various wave forms upto 80 MHz Functional NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Signal Analyzer Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Analysis of electrical Signals in range of 20-26.5 GHZ Functional NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hall Effect Measurement System Advance Energy Materials and Characterization Lab, UPCASE Electrical and electronic properties of semiconductors can be precisely determined over a wide range of currents Functional HMS 3000 by Ecopia NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LCR Meter Advance Energy Materials and Characterization Lab, UPCASE Electrical parameters such as resistance , inductance (L), capacitance , dissipation factor (DF), quality factor (Q) and dielectric constant of different materials and circuit elements can be precisely determined with this system in the 10 Hz to 2 MHz range Functional 7600 Plus by IET Lab ISA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Nanofiber Electrospinning System Advance Energy Materials and Characterization Lab, UPCASE Electros prayed particiles and electro spun fibers can easily by developed from suspensions / solutions of different materials Functional Fluidnatek LE-10 by Bioinicia NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Tube Fumace Advance Energy Materials and Characterization Lab, UPCASE Heat treatment of samples in inert or vacuum up to 1800?C max can be carried out in this furnace Functional by MTI Corporation USA NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Muffle Furnace Advance Energy Materials and Characterization Lab, UPCASE Heat treatment of samples in air up to 1800?C max can be carried out in this furnace Functional MTI Corporation USA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Grinding & Polishing System Advance Energy Materials and Characterization Lab, UPCASE Six different samples can be simultaneously prepared employing this system. Its capable of rendering highly polished surfaces, provided optimized parameters are set and proper slurry and polishing cloth chosen Functional 2V Forcimat by Metkon NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Spin Coater Advance Energy Materials and Characterization Lab, UPCASE Thin films from solutions / dispersions of different materials can be deposited using this technique Functional XTC 100 by MTI Corporation USA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Atomospheric Plasma Spray Coating Thermal Energy lab, USPCASE It is used to produce a high quality coating by a comination of high temperature, high energy heat source, a relatively inert sprayig medium, usually argon and high particle velocities Functional SX-80 by GuangZhou SANXIN Metal S&T Co Ltd NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High Velocity Oxygen Fuel (HVOF) Spray Coating Thermal Spray Facilities, UPCASE A supersonic flame spraying equipment (HVOF) gas function is used to thermal spray powder that are tungsten powder, nickel chromium carbide chromium, nicket chromium alloy Functional SX-5000/6000 by GuangZhou SANXIN Metal S&T Co Ltd NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Average Power Sensor for Universal use Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Average Power Sensor for Universal use , op in freq range of 10 MHZ-18 MHZ and 200 PW-200MW Functional NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Wire Arc Spray Coating Thermal Spray Facilities, UPCASE Used for thermal spray wires, spraying molybdenum, zinc, aluminum, copper, lead, stainless steel Functional SX-600 by GuangZhou SANXIN Metal S&T Co Ltd NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Aerotech 1010SMB4-E1000LD Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Stepper Motor with Speed of 1500 rpm and Output Power of 380 W Functional NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Powder Flame Spraying Thermal Spray Facilities, UPCASE Used for thermal spray powder i.e., nickel, YSZ, chromium alloy, such as thermal spraying metal ceramic coating Functional SX-6010 by GuangZhou SANXIN Metal S&T Co Ltd NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A ECP Systems Model 220 Industrial Plant Emulator Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) This trainer is ideal for studying control of practical systems with set of experiments with options of drive and load inertias, gear ratios is turbine torques (programmable) etc Functional NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Lathe Machine Thermal Spray Facilities, UPCASE Manufacturing & Repair Functional Local (Mediena) NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A AC & DC Motor Generator Set Lab Volt Dissectible System Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) It provides hands-on training in the construction and operation of rotating machines Functional 8020 NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Mobile Communication (GSM) GSM Mobile Phone Test Bench Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Is designed for a wide range of test and measurement of GSM applications. Provides high-performance 18-slot PXI backplane with a high-output power supply Functional NI PXI 1045 NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Muffle Furnace Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE It is a furnace in which the subject material is isolated from the fuel and all of the produts of combustion, including gases and flying ash by heating at a maximum temperature of 1200'C Functional China SX-5-12 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Fuel Cell Testing System Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE A fuel cell is an electrochemical cell that converts the chemical energy from a fuel into electricity through an electrochemical reaction of hydrogen fuel with oxygen or another oxidizing agent Functional China SX-5-12 NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Oscilloscope 100 MHZ Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) To display and analyze the waveform of electronic signals Functional 2012E/ 2014 NA 15 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A e-Health Sensor Platform complete Kit V2.0 for Arduino Information Security, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Sensing Biometric/ Medical Data for Arduino kit Functional Rasp berry Pl & Intel Galileo NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Battery Testing System Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE Battery testing instruments for impedance and discharge testing to identify individual weak cells before they fail and simulate load conditions to ensure the batteries are working perfect Functional NI-USA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Wiebe Tech USB Write Blocker/ Drive eRazer Ultra/ Forensic Dock Electrical Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Forensic Investigation Functional Wiebe Tech NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Electrochemical Work Station Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE It is used to measure the activity of a catalyst material using different techniques such as CV, LSV etc Functional CH instruments NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Raspberry Pie kit Computer Software Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) Can be used for a wide range of projects where limited intelligence is required Functional Raspberry NA 2 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Nvidia GPU (6 GB Ram) Computer Software Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) It is used primarily for 3D applications and mathematically-intensive tasks Functional Nvidia NA 1 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Sorption Analyzer Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE It is used to measure the pore size analysis and adsorption and desorption analysis of gases Functional Quantachrome USA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A GSM Module Sim 900 Computer Software Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) It is Quad-band GSM/GPRS module. It can communicate with controllers via AT commands Functional NA 2 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High Pressure Compact Lab Reactor Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE It is used for heating purpose of a sample in a compact environment at a maximum temperature of 800?C Functional PARR Instruments Company USA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A IP Cameras Computer Software Engineering, MILITARY COLLEGE OF SIGNALS (MCS) IP based Cameras for images and videos Functional NA 2 Dr Imran Touqir +92-321-4075580 imrantqr@mcs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Rayonet Chamber Reactor Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE It is a photochemical reactor used for photochemical reactions Functional by Nanowak NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 4 Probe Conductivity Meter Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE It determines the conductivity of sample in form of a thin wafar, such as a thin semiconductor aterial deposited on a substrate Functional Jandaal Engineering UK NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Supercritcal Fluid Extractor Energy Storage and Conservation System Lab, UPCASE Process of separating one component (the extract) from another (the matrix) using supercritical fluids as the extracting solvent. C02 is the most used supercritical fluid, sometimes modified by co-solvents. Different seeds/biomass can be treated to extract the oil that can be converted into biodiesel Functional NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatogram-HPLC Biofuel Energy Lab, UPCASE A technique is used to separate, identigy and quantify each component in a mixture. It relies on pumps to pass a pressurized liquid solvent containing the sample mixture through a column filled with a solid adsorbent material. It provides different flow rates for the different components and leading to the separation of the compnents as they flow out the column Functional NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flash point Tester Biofuel Energy Lab, UPCASE An instrument that determines the flash point of a sample, which is the temperature point at which the sample vaporizes to another composition state in the air that can be ignited. It ranges 25C-300C Functional NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction - PCR Biofuel Energy Lab, UPCASE Laboratory technique of molecular biology based on the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). It monitors the amplification of a targeted DNA molecule during the PCR, i.e., in real-time, and not at its end, as in conventional PCR Functional NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Algea Online Monitor Biofuel Energy Lab, UPCASE Algal Online Monitor is a portable and robust device for online detection and continuous monitoring of photosynthetic microorganisms in both natural and artifical water bodies. It detects variety of cyanobacteria, green and brown algae, diatoms and other microbes. It's extremely high sensitivity (30 ng Chl/l) allows early detection of very low concentrations of these organisms Functional NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Multi Meter with K-Type Thermocouple and Clamp Meter Solar Energy Lab, UPCASE Conductive Measurements Functional China NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pyranometer with Handheld Read-out Unit and Data Logger Solar Energy Lab, UPCASE Electrical Measurements Functional China NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Solar / Heat Source Vapor Turbine System Solar Energy Lab, UPCASE Solar and flux measurements Functional USA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3 Phase Power Quality & Energy Analyzer Solar Energy Lab, UPCASE Electric Power mearurements and analysis Functional USA NA 1 US-PAK CENTRE FOR ADVANCE STUDIES AND ENERGY (USPCAS-E) Dr Arsalan Khawaja +92-51 9085527 arsalan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Fourier-Trnasform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) SNS Instrument Lab It is used to obtain an infrared spectrum of absorption or emission of a solid, liquid or gas. Functional Bruker (Germany) / Alpha PN-1010951/07 S/no 200488 NA 1 Dr Manzar Sohail +92-51-9085-559 manzar.sohail@sns.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) SNS Instrument Lab It is used to separate, identify and quantify each component in a mixture. Functional Waters Corporation (USA) / 1525 Binary Gradient Solvent Delivery System NA 1 Dr Manzar Sohail +92-51-9085-559 manzar.sohail@sns.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Cyclic Voltameter (CV) SNS Instrument Lab Measures the current that develops in an electrochemical cell. Functional Gamry (USA) / S. No 35112" NA 1 Dr Manzar Sohail +92-51-9085-559 manzar.sohail@sns.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Arc-melt Furnace SNS Instrument Lab It is used to synthesize different metallic alloys at high temperature of 3500C Functional Edmund Buhler (Germany) GmbH / MAM General H-180T NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Laser-Scriber / Laser Engraver SNS Instrument Lab It is used to engrave and draw micro-scale patterns and design using computer-controlled software. Functional China NA 1 Dr Manzar Sohail +92-51-9085-559 manzar.sohail@sns.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Spin Coater SNS Instrument Lab It is used for coating different layers at lab-scale. Functional USA NA 1 Dr Manzar Sohail +92-51-9085-559 manzar.sohail@sns.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Analog Signal Generator 250 KHz-20GHz Microwave Engineering Research Lab, CE&ME Used in designing, testing, trouble shooting and repairing electronics or electroacoustic devices Functional Malaysia, E8257D NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Performance network analyzer (PNA) Series Network Analyzer 10 MHz-20GHz Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Measures the network parameters of electrical networks Functional USA, Malysia, E83262B NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Spectrum Analyzer 3 Hz - 26.5 GHz Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Display signal amplitude (strength) as it varies by signal frequency Functional USA, E4440A NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Signal Source Analyzer 10 MHz - 7 GHz MILITARY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING (MCE), Electrical Lab To analyze and measure the signal Functional Malaysia, E5052A NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Infinium Oscilloscope Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) To analyze the signal Functional Malaysia, 54855A DSO NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A EPM-P Series Power Meter Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) To measure the power flow Functional Malaysia, E4417A NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Keithley 50 MHz Arbitrary Waveform Generator Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) It generate electrical waveform which can be either repetitive or single shot Functional 3390 NA 2 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Logic Analyzer Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) It captures and displays multiple signals from a digital system or digital circuits. It can convert captured data into timing diagrams, protocol decodes, state machine traces etc Functional Malaysia, 1681A NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LPKF Proto Mat H-60 Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Used to produce Printed Circuit Board Prototypes Functional USA, UK, EU NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hydrodynamic Lubrication Unit / Journal bearing Friction Apparatus Dynamics & Controls Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) To determine the friction torque in a plain journal bearing under varying conditions of load, speed and lubrication Functional Cussons, UK NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Software Defined Radio Kits Digital Signal Processing & Digital System Design, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Software defined radio is a radio communication system where components are implemented in hardware instead implemented by means of software on a personal computer or embedded system Functional USRP N 200 NA 4 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A NI ELVIS II Embedded System and Vision Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Data Acquisition and Lab Testing / Sensors data can be logged for analysis during R&D / Automated system can be prototyped for lab demonstration, before finalizing Functional NA 6 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Computer Numerical Control Milling Machine Industrial Automation Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Machining / Metal parts can be fabricated during R&D / Milling tasks can be performed on metals with 3 axes movement of tool Functional TRIAC FANUC NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Computer Numerical Control Lathe Machine Industrial Automation Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Machining / Metal parts can be fabricated during R&D / Turning and facing related machining tasks can be performed on metals Functional Cyclone NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3D Printer and Scanner Robotics and Control Labs / DMTs, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Prototyping / Prototypes of parts can be developed during R&D / 3D printing of PLA material, 3D scanning of parts Functional da Vinci 1.0 Pro 3 in 1 NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Electroencephalography (EEG) Wireless Amplifiers SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING & COMPUTER SCIENCE (SEECS), Neuro- informatics Lab Record neural / brain activity wirelessly Functional BrainProducts LiveAmp NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science & Technology, Islamabad(NUST) N/A EEG Wired Amplifier SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING & COMPUTER SCIENCE (SEECS), Neuro- informatics Lab Record neural / brain activity in a wired expreiment Functional BrainProducts VAmp NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A EEG Wireless Amplifiers SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING & COMPUTER SCIENCE (SEECS), Neuro- informatics Lab Record neural / brain activity wirelessly Functional MBT - Smarting NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hardness Tester Structures Lab, COLLEGE OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERING (CAE) Hardness test of metallic samples upto 150 HR as per American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards Functional Japan NA 1 Squadron Leader Muhammad Ayaz +92-321-9018553 cae@nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A EEG Wireless Amplifiers SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING & COMPUTER SCIENCE (SEECS), Neuro- informatics Lab Record neural / brain activity wirelessly Functional TMSi - Mobita NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pendulum Impact Testing Machine Structures Lab, COLLEGE OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERING (CAE) Impact testing of material samples as per American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards Functional Germany NA 1 Squadron Leader Muhammad Ayaz +92-321-9018553 cae@nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3D TV with Glasses SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING & COMPUTER SCIENCE (SEECS), Neuro- informatics Lab For 3D visualizations of the Brain Functional Sony NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Torsion Testing Machine Structures Lab, COLLEGE OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERING (CAE) Torsion Testing from 200 Nm up to 150 kNm as per American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards Functional Germany NA 1 Squadron Leader Muhammad Ayaz +92-321-9018553 cae@nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A EEG Caps - Passive SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING & COMPUTER SCIENCE (SEECS), Neuro- informatics Lab To place the electrodes on head Functional EasyCap NA 35 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A EEG Caps - Active SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING & COMPUTER SCIENCE (SEECS), Neuro- informatics Lab To place the electrodes on head Functional EasyCap NA 13 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 2ft x 3ft Subsonic closed circuit wind tunnel Aerodynamics Lab, COLLEGE OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERING (CAE) To teach undergraduate students regarding wind tunnel testing and to carryout graduate research work Functional M/S Aerolab supply Co. Maryland,USA NA 1 Squadron Leader Muhammad Ayaz +92-321-9018553 cae@nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A DC Inverter AC/Heater SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING & COMPUTER SCIENCE (SEECS), Neuro- informatics Lab Climate control for proper EEG recording Functional Gree NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Lab Volt Radar Training System Radar Lab, COLLEGE OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERING (CAE) Introduction of basic radar principles Equipment with Lab Volt Radar Training System Functional 8095 NA 1 Squadron Leader Muhammad Ayaz +92-321-9018553 cae@nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Spirometer CoNNeKt Research Lab, SEECS Respiratory Rate Measurements Functional Spirometer PF-100 NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Cascade Summit Prob Station Microwave, COLLEGE OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERING (CAE) Semiconductor Manufacturing equipment Functional 12000 B NA 1 Squadron Leader Muhammad Ayaz +92-321-9018553 cae@nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A HP SDN Switch CoNNeKt Research Lab, SEECS HP Programmable SDN switch Functional HP Procurve NA 2 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 300V-8x8 Tower Assembly Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Farfield and Near Field AUT Stage Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 300V-8x8 Tower Base Assembly w/x carriage Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Farfield and Near Field AUT Stage Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Roll Stage Assembly Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Farfield and Near Field AUT Stage Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Rotary Joint, DC-40GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Farfield and Near Field AUT Stage Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A AZ/El Positioner System 55lb (25kg) capacity Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Farfield and Near Field AUT Stage Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A AUT/Transmit Ant. Stand (1.5 vertical rail) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Farfield and Near Field AUT Stage Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Assembly, 1.7GHz - 2.6GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Radiation Pattern Measurement Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Assembly, 2.6GHz - 3.95GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Radiation Pattern Measurement Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Assembly, 3.95GHz -5.85GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Radiation Pattern Measurement Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Assembly, 5.85GHz - 8.2GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Radiation Pattern Measurement Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Assembly, 8.2GHz - 12.4GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Radiation Pattern Measurement Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Assembly, 12.4GHz - 18GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Radiation Pattern Measurement Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Assembly, 18GHz - 26.5GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Radiation Pattern Measurement Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Probe Assembly, 26.5GHz - 40GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Radiation Pattern Measurement Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Standard Beam Controller (SBC) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Antenna Range Controllers (ARC) 4-Axis Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 19" Rack mount Power Distribution Unit Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Near Field Systems, INC (NSI) NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA 0.75GHz - 1.12GHz Output: SMA-female Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA 1.12GHz - 1.7GHz Output: SMA-female Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA WR430 1.7-2.6GHz (10dB) Output: SMA Female Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA WR284 2.6-3.95GHz (10dB) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standarnd Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA WR187 3.95-5.85GHz (10dB) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA WR137 5.85-8.2GHz (15dB) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA WR137 8.2-12.4GHz (15dB) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) N/A SGA WR62 12.4-18GHz (15dB) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA WR42 18-26.5GHz (20dB) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SGA WR42 26.5 - 40GHz GHz (20dB) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Broadband Horn Ant 0.8GHz - 18GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Broadband Horn Ant 18GHz - 40GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Standard Gain Antenna For Gain Measurements Functional AI-INFO MW NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A VNA 10MHZ-20GHz, 2port, 4 receivers Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Switch Control Unit (SCU) for Agilent 85331B switch Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Broadband Microwave Amplifier (2 - 18GHz) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Frequency Multiplier 2x, 20-40GHz Out (Doubler) Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Lo/IF Distribution Unit Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Amplifier 0.5-26.5GHz, 25 dB gain Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A BP Meter CoNNeKt Research Lab, SEECS Blood Pressure readings Functional Omron 10 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Test Mixer Module 2 - 50GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Reference Mixer Module 2 - 50GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Amplifier 2-50GHz, 20 dBm at 40GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A MiWi Module Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications Functional SM01-MiWi v1.0 NA 15 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Coupler, 1-40GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Coupler, Coaxial, 1-40GHz Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Antenna Measurement Workstation Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Anechoic Chamber Control Room Functional DELL NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A GSM Module Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications Functional SM01-GSM v1.1 NA 3 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3500 VA INSULATION Transformer EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LoRA Module Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications Functional SM01-Lora v1.0 NA 3 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LISN EQPT SINGLE PHASE EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Ethernet Module Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications Functional SM01-ETH v1.0 NA 8 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LISN EQUIPMENT- 3 PHASE -16 AMP EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A PLL 80-120MHZ RF GENERATOR Anechoic Chamber, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Moisture Meter Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications Functional V1.0 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF GENERATOR 800/960MHZ EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Expansion Board Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications Functional SX-142 v1.0 NA 10 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF GENERATOR 1400MHZ / 2000MHZ EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF PRE-Amp 150khz-30Mhz / 30Mhz -1Ghz EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF AMPLIFIER 2W 1400MHZ/2000MHZ EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF AMP 4W 800MHZ/960MHZ EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF AMP 30WATT 80 MHZ/120MHZ EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Electromagnetic Field Measuring System EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Silo Mechanical Assembly Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS For Storage Testing-For placement of sensors and monitoring the inside conditions Functional NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Expansion Board Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications Functional SX-155 v1.0 NA 3 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vertix-5 Boards Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS Field Programmable Gate Array Kits (FPGA) Functional NA 5 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Sensor Equipment - Stargate kit WisNet Research Lab For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real sensor network Functional Crossbow NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Sensor Devices (Mica-z- etc) Kit Adaptive Signal Processing (ASPL), SEECS Functional Crossbow NA For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real sensor network 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A MCS kit 410-CA Kit WisNet Research Lab, SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real sensor network Functional Crossbow NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Telos-B Mots WisNet Research Lab, SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real sensor network Functional Crossbow NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Imote Buildes kit Content WisNet Research Lab, SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real sensor network Functional Crossbow NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Olimex Kit WisNet Research Lab, SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real sensor network Functional Olimex NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Dragino LoRa IoT Kit WisNet Research Lab, SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real long range sensor network Functional Dragino NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Raspberry Pi kit WisNet Research Lab, SEECS For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real sensor network Functional Raspberry Pi NA 4 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Power, Harmonic & Flicker Analyzer EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Low Distortion Power Source EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A ESD GENERATOR (18KV) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A BURST & SURGE GENERATOR(single phase) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Burst & Voltage Variation Gen. EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A MINI LISN EQUIPMENT EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A EMI SIMULATOR EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF PRESELECTOR EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A CLAMP For BURST & SURGE Generator EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Modular Shielded Room(4x2x2m) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) EMC Shielded Room Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A TEM Cell for Immunity & Radiated Emission EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) EMC Shielded Room Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A EMI Ant.(30MHz 200MHz) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Log Periodic Ant (30MHz 1000MHz) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Power Amplifier 70W (10MHz - 1GHz) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Immunity Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF Current Sensor Probe (9KHz - 200MHz) with Traceable Calibration kit EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Current Injection Probe (10KHz - 400MHz) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A CMAD 20B Common Mode Absorption Device EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A KEMZ 801AS5 EM Clamp EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Capacitive Voltage Probe Teseq CVP 2200A EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional New-Tronics NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Single laser infrared thermometer 10:1 spot EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional Fluke NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Handheld Spectrum Analyzer 100KHz - 8GHz EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional Rhodes & Schwarz NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SPECTRUM ANALYZER (9KHz TO 3GHZ) FS 300 EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional Rhodes & Schwarz NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A R&S Signal Generator (100KHz-22GHz) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Analogue RF Signal Functional Rhodes & Schwarz NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A R&S Signal Analyzer (10Hz-30GHz) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) RF Spectrum Analyzer Functional Rhodes & Schwarz NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A R&S ENV432 Four Line V-Network (9KHz-30MHz) EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional Rhodes & Schwarz NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Yokogawa DL9140 Oscilloscope EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional Yokogawa NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Haida Vibration Table EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional Haida Vibration Table NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Haida Temprature and Humidity Chamber EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Compatibility Testing Functional Haida International NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Performance network analyzer (PNA) Series Network Analyzer (10MHz-20GHz) Microwave Research Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) S-Parameter Measurements Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Raspberry Pi kit WisNet Research Lab, SEECS Functional For Internet of Things (IoT) applications - settingup a real sensor network NA 4 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Zigbee Demo Kit WisNet Research Lab, SEECS Functional Zigbee NA 4 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SmartSIM Vision Image & Signal Processing (VISPro), SEECS MIS Simulator Functional NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Omni Devices Vision Image & Signal Processing (VISPro), SEECS Input devices with Haptic Feedback Functional Phantom Omni 6DOF NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Cell MicroInjection System Vision Image & Signal Processing (VISPro), SEECS With a 40X zoom Microscope Functional NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Precision Semi Condutor Parameter Analyzer EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Semiconductor Device Characterization Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pioneer P3-DX Mobile Robot ROMI Lab, SEECS Differential drive robot for on ground navigation Functional MobileRobots LLC, PIONEER NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3.5mm Economy Calibration Kit EMI Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Calibration Kit of PNA Functional Agilent Technologies NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Laser Rangefinder ROMI Lab, SEECS Range finding for robotic applications Functional SICK LMS500 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A R&S Signal Generator (5KHz-6GHz) Microwave Research Lab, Research Institute For Microwave And Millimeter-Wave Studies (Rimms) Analogue RF Signal Functional Rhodes & Schwarz NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A R&S Signal Analyzer (20Hz-7GHz) Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) RF Spectrum Analyzer Functional Rhodes & Schwarz NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Software Defined Radio Information & Transmission (IPT) Lab, SEECS A communication system where hardware components are implemented in software Functional USRP B200 (8), USRP N200 (3) NA 11 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Huber+Suhner SMA Tool Set Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) RF Cable Repairing Kit Functional Huber+Suhner NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Huber+Suhner Crimp Tool Set Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Crimp Tool Kit for Cable Repairing Functional Huber+Suhner NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Storage Oscilloscope 100MHz 500MSa/S Microwave Engineering Research Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) Digital Oscilloscope Functional Rigol NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Antenna Information & Transmission (IPT) Lab, SEECS Used with USRPs Functional VERT 2450 NA 13 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LPKF ProtoMat S103 Printed Circuit Board Fabrication (PCB) Lab, COLLEGE OF ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (CE&ME) RF PCB prototyping Functional LPKF NA 1 Dr M. Umar Khan rimms.testing@nust.edu.pk +92-51-90852124 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Antenna Information & Transmission (IPT) Lab, SEECS Used with USRPs Functional Log Periodic Directional Antennas NA 5 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Antenna Information & Transmission (IPT) Lab, SEECS Used with USRPs Functional WL-5158-14D45DVHPB-001 5.8GHz 14dBi Outdoor Directional Panel Antenna (with accessories) NA 6 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Frequency Mixer Information & Transmission (IPT) Lab, SEECS To down/up convert frequencies Functional Mini-Circuits 15542 ZFM-4212 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LNAs Information & Transmission (IPT) Lab, SEECS RF Front End Functional 20dB Low Noise LNA RF Broadband Amplifier NA 4 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LoRa Gateway + Adapter + Antenna Information & Transmission (IPT) Lab, SEECS Nodes for long range communications Functional LG01-P 433MHz by Dragino NA 4 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 8- Slot chassis for housing and controlling data acquisition signal conditioning Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab NI Instrumentation Cards Chassis / embedded control and acquisition system Functional NI PX -1042 NA 8 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 4 slot chassis Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS NI Instrumentation Cards Chassis / General Purpose Relays - RF Switches - Fault Insertion Functional NI-PXI 1031 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RF down convertor of high freq signal to IF range Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS NI Instrumentation cards / RF frequency converters are integrated component assemblies required for converting microwave signals into lower (or intermediate) frequency ranges for further processing. Functional NI-PXI-5600 NA 3 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 2.7 GHZ Up convertor ID signals to high freq Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS NI Instrumentation cards / For a high frequency DC/DC boost Converter Functional NI-PXI-5610 NA 3 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A MXI-3 interface connector Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Connector cable Functional PXI- 8330 NA 17 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A MXI-3 interface connector Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Connector cable Functional PCI-8330 NA 5 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 1 M gate R series Reconfigurable I/O device Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / used for custom data acquisition Functional NI-PXI- 7831R NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 266 MHZ embedded PXI controller for real time Application Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation/ Provides a high-performance, compact embedded computer solution for PXI, CompactPCI, and PXI Express systems Functional NI- PXI- 8145 RT NA 5 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 16Bit 200 MS/s AWG Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation/ High-performance control and scientific research Functional NI-PXI-5422 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Oscilloscope(100MHz, 100S/s 8 bit digitizer) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital oscilloscope card Functional NI-PXI-5112 NA 3 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 5.5 digits Multimeter Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital multimeter card Functional NI-PXI 4060 NA 3 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Multifunction I/o Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation/combine common I/Os include analog ,digital input/output cables into single form factor Functional NI-PXI- 6040E NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 1* 4 1.3 GHz MUX part . No 777987-01 Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation/Project in industrial control and automation sector Functional NI-PXI- 2590 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 100 MS/s AWG OSP Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital oscilloscope card Functional NI-PXI-5441 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 16 bit 100 MS/s AWG Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital function generator card Functional NI-PXI-5421 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 12 bit 200MS/s digital oscilloscope Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital function generator card Functional NI-PXI-5124 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A M series Multifunction DAQ (1MS/s 16 analog input DAQ) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital-to-Analog Convertor Functional NI-PXI-6250 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 6 1/2 digits flex DMM Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation/ digital multi-meter in order to measure different electrical parameter Functional NI-PXI- 4072 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 500 MHz dual 8x1 50 R Multiplexer Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / multiplexer to supply full binary decoding data selection Functional NI-PXI- 2593 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Dynamic Cone Penetration (DCP) Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For small scale bearing capacity of soil Functional Fayaz Steel Work Nowshera NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 64 MS/s digitizer Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / Support DPP-QDC firmware Functional NI-PXI-5620 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flash / Fire Point Apparatus Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For flashing and fire temperature of bitumen Functional Royal Inc NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Penetration Test Apparatus Bitumen (Penetrometer) Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For Penetration grade and value of bitumen Functional Local NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pavement / Rock Core Drilling Machine Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For core extraction from field Functional Control Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 16 I/P, 16 bit , 200ks /s . Multifunction I/o Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation/ 100KS/s Low gain Multi-Function DAQ board Functional NI-DAQ PAD 6016 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Tb 2705 Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / The TB-2705 allows you to easily connect analog input, analog output, counter-timer, and digital I/O signals to your National Instruments device Functional TB 2705 NA 3 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Gyratory Compactor Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For preparation of Gyratory samples of asphalt mix Functional Control Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Rolling Thin Film Oven (RTFO) Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For short term aging of bitumen Functional Control Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pressure Ageing Vessel (PAV) Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For long term aging of bitumen Functional Prentex USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Basic multifunction I/O BD Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / provide a variety of I/O functions on a single plug-in card Functional NI PCI 6014 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Asphalt Recovery Apparatus (Abson method) Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For separating bitumen from emulsion and solvents Functional Tecnotest Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Aggregate Impact Value Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of impact load bearing of aggregate Functional ELE UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Compact vision system Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / To create a complete vision system, explore other vision system components, such as lighting Functional NI-CVs- 1455 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Standard Penetrometer Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For Penetration grade and value of bitumen Functional Local NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Ring and Ball Apparatus Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of softening temperature of bitumen Functional Local NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Camera basler A60IF 1394 640*480, 60FPS Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / High quality and performance, low list prices camera Functional IEEE 1394 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Asphalt Ductility Apparatus Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of elasticity of bitumen Functional Local NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vision builder AI PCI 8254 Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / configurable software for building/ bench making and deploying Functional PCI- 8254R NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Bitumen Extraction Machine Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To find percentage of bitumen in asphaltic concrete Functional Local NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Marshall Apparatus Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For stability and flow test of asphaltic mix Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Electric Density Gauge Durham USA Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For non-destructive density measurement of roads Functional Durham USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Gyratory Compactor Reinhart USA Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For preparation of Gyratory samples of asphalt mix Functional Reinhart USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Fakiness and Elongation Set Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of aggregate shape percentages Functional China NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 20 Liters Mixer Machine for Asphalt Concrete Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For mixing of aggregate and bitumen for preparation of asphaltic mix Functional China NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Soundness Test of Aggregate Apparatus Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of thawing and freezing effect on aggregate Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Power supply 24 v , 50w (Power cords) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Power supply Functional NI-1450 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Atterberg's Limit Apparatus Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For liquid limit and plastic limit determination Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Noise rejecting , shielded I/o connector block Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Shielded I/o connector Functional SCB-68 NA 6 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Cleveland Flash & Fire Point Apparatus Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For flashing and fire temperature of bitumen Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Low Cost Unshielded I/O Connector Block for Connecting DAQ cards with Chasis Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Shielded I/o connector Functional CB68-LP NA 7 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Saybolt Viscometer Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For viscosity measurement of bitumen Functional Technotest Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Marshall Apparatus Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Functional Local NA For stability and flow test of asphaltic mix 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 2 Axis stepper/servo motion controller Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / 2 axis stepper and servo motion motor controller Functional NI-PXI-7340 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Asphalt Mixer Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For Mixing of aggregate and bitumen for preparation of asphaltic mix Functional Malaysia NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 2 Axis integrated stepper driver power unit 240v Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / Motor power unit Functional MID-7604/7602 NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Asphalt Ductlity Machine 1500 MM Stroke (BM-150) Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of elasticity of bitumen Functional Matest Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Softening Point Apparatus automatic Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of Softening temperature of bitumen Functional Impact UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Universal motion interface w/d Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / Simplify integration of third party drivers and amplifiers Functional UMI-7774 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Universal motion interface w/d Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / Simplify integration of third party drivers and amplifiers Functional UMI-7774 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3 M gate R series RIO device (8AI,8Ao,96 Dio) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / feature user defined ,onboard processing for complete flexibility of system timing and trigging Functional NI- PXI- 7833R NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 64 channel 300V CAT 1 Multiplexer Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / Radiation tolerant multiplexer Functional NI PXI-2527 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High density multi configuration matrix Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / serve high-channel-count switching applications Functional NI PXI-2529 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Screw terminal block for ni pxi 2529 as 4x32 matrix Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / used to make signal connections to the NI PXI-2527 multiplexer switch Functional NI TB-2634 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Triple O/P DC p/ supply 0-+6V, 0-+20V,0-+20V,1A Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / Triple output power supply Functional NI PXI-4110 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High speed pattern Digital I/O and shaking Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / input or output a digital pattern under the timing control of a clock signal Functional NI PXI- 6534 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A USRP-2 kits Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / Dual Channel Transceiver (70 MHz - 6GHz) Functional B210 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A NIOS II development kit (IC20) cyclone edition Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Design: FPGA Kit Functional Altera IC20 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A NIOS II Development kit stratix (1S10) edition Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Design: FPGA Kit Functional 1S10 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A NIOS II STRATIX II development kit (2S60) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Design: FPGA Kit Functional NA 4 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A NIOS II Development Kit (Cyclone II Edition) (2C70) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Design: FPGA Kit Functional NA 4 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A DSP development kit cyclone II edition Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit / provides a hardware platform for developing and prototyping high-performance and high-bandwidth application designs Functional DK2C70N NA 4 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A DSP Development kit Startix edition Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit / provides a hardware platform for developing and prototyping high-performance and high-bandwidth application designs Functional EP1S25 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A DSP Development Kit Startix II edition (2S60) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional 2S60 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Servo-Hydraulic Universal Testing System IPC Global-Australia (UTM 25) Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For resilient modulus and indirect tensile testing of asphaltic mix Functional IPC Gobel Australia NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Asphalt Binder Analayzer 240 V Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For bitumen percentage determination of asphaltic mix Functional Carbolite UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Marshall impact automatic compactor and cabinet for marshall compactor Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For preparation of asphaltic mix sample for Marshall test Functional Control Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Los Angeles Abrasion machine Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of Abrasion value of aggregate Functional Local NA 2 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Degree of solubility of bitumen Transportation lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For determination of percentage of solubility of asphalt in solvent Functional Technotest Italy NA 2 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Element Analyzer Advance Analytical Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Used for elemental analysis particularly in the investigation of metals, glass, ceramics and building materials, and for research in geochemistry, archaeology and art objects. Functional Jeol Germany JSK 3202M NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Laser Scattering Particle Size Distribution Analyzer Advance Analytical Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Used to measure particle-size in wastewater Range (0.1um -600um) Functional HORIBA Japan LA-300 NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A UV Spectrophotometer Advance Analytical Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Used for the quantitative determination of different analyses, such as transition metal ions, highly conjugated organic compounds, and biological macromolecules. Functional Analytik Jena / Specod 200 NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A UV-Visible Spectrophotometer Environmental Chemistry Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Used for Ionic Analysis in water samples Functional PG Model T6OU /PG Instruments, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Portable UV/Vis Spectrophotometer Environmental Chemistry Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Portable spectrophotometer is used to measure Optical density of a sample. It measures intensity as a function of the light source wavelength Functional Model DR/2400 NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Universal Testing Machine Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Testing of Steel Bars Functional Control/Matest NA 2 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Compression testing Machine Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Compresion testing of Materials Functional Control NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Non Destructive Testing Functional Matest NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Rebound Hammer Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Non Destructive Testing Functional Matest NA 3 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Shrinkage Apparatus Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shrinkage of Cementation Material Functional DAAD NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Bar Locator Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Non Destructive Testing Functional Proceq NA 2 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flexural Machine Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Beam Test in Flexural Functional Matest NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Windsor Prob Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Non Destructive Testing Functional James instrument NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Resistivity Metre Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Find the Rust on Bar Functional CMt Instrument NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flow Visualization Apparatus HM 150.10 Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To demonstrate the phenomenon of fluid flow. To demonstrate the flow behavior around obstacles of various sizes and shapes. To show the effect of sink and source on the stream lines. Functional GUNT/Germany NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Drag Coefficient for Spheres HM 135 Structure Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the sink speed of various types of spheres in fluids and its comparison with analytical solution. To determine the drag coefficient for various objects with different sizes and shapes Functional GUNT/Germany NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Basic Hydraulic Bench F1-10-A Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To provide controlled water supply Functional Arm Field, UK NA 4 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Dead Weight Calibrator F1-11 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To calibrate a Bourdon type pressure gauge and to determine the gauge errors. To determine the measurement errors in the reference pressure source used for calibration. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 3 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hydrostatic Pressure F1-12, Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the hydrostatic thrust acting on a plane surface immersed in water. To determine the position of the line of action of the thrust and to compare the position determined by experiment with the theoretical position Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flow Over Weirs F1-13 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the characteristics of open-channel flow over a rectangular notch and a triangular (Vee) notch. To determine values of the discharge coefficient for rectangular and Vee notches. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Metacentric Height F1-14 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To locate the position of the Metacentre (M) of a floating body, by determining its distance from the centre of gravity (G); and the Metacentric Height (GM) Functional NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Bernouli's Theorem Demonstration F1-15 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To investigate the validity of the Bernoulli equation when applied to the steady flow of water in a tapered duct. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Impact of Jet F1-16 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To investigate the reaction forces produced by the change in momentum of a fluid flow. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Orifice and free Jet Flow F1-17 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the coefficient of velocity of two small orifices from jet trajectory under constant head. To determine the coefficient of discharge of two small orifices from jet trajectory under constant head. To determine the coefficient of velocity under varying head. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Orifice Discharge F1-17A Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the coefficient of discharge, velocity and contraction for a small orifice. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Energy losses in Pipes F1-18 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To investigate the head loss due to friction in the flow of water through a straight pipe for laminar and turbulent flows. To determine the friction factor of the pipe flow for laminar and turbulent flows. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flow Channel F1-19 Advance Analytical Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To visualize a range of open-channel flow behavior. To visualize flow patterns around immersed objects in steady flow. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Osborne Reynold's Demonstration F1-20 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To observe laminar, transitional and turbulent pipe flow. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flow meter Demonstration F1-21 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To investigate the operation and characteristics of three different basic types of flowmeters, including their accuracy and comparison of energy losses. To investigate the characteristics of a Venturimeter. To investigate the characteristics of an orifice plate. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Energy losses in bends F1-22 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the loss factors for flow through a range of pipe fittings (bends), a contraction, an enlargement and a gate-valve. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Free & Forced Vortices F1-23 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the surface profile of a forced vortex. To investigate the physical phenomenon associated with a free vortex. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hydraulic Ram F1-24 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To demonstrate the operating principles of the hydraulic ram. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Demonstration Pelton Turbine F1-25 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the operating characteristics of a Pelton turbine at various speeds. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Series/parallel pumps F1-26-A Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the head/flow rate characteristics for a number of pump configurations. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Centrifugal Pump Characteristics F1-27-A Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To determine the characteristics of a centrifugal pump. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Cavitation Demonstration F1-28 Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To demonstrate the appearance and sound of Cavitation in a hydraulic system. To demonstrate the conditions for Cavitation to occur (liquid at its vapour pressure). To show how Cavitation can be prevented by raising the static pressure of a liquid above its vapour pressure by controlling end condition. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flow Channel and Flume FM-27B Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To Study the characteristics of Open Channel flow Functional Afro Asian Intl (SOLTEQ), Malaysia NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Osborne Reynolds Apparatus Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To observe laminar, transitional and turbulent pipe flow. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Fluid Properties and Hydrostatic Bench Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To study the charctersitics of water at static condition Functional Afro Asian Intl (SOLTEQ), Malaysia NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pipes Surge and Hammer Apparatus Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To demonstrate the phenomenon of water hammer. To show the movement of pressure wave (surge) in the conduit. To demonstrate the effectiveness of surge tank. Functional Afro Asian Intl (SOLTEQ), Malaysia NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Basic Self Contained Flume with accesseries Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To Study the characteristics of Open Channel flow Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Turbine Service Unit for Axial and Radial Flow Impulse and Reaction Turbines (FM-6X) Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Turbine characteristics of impulse turbine. Comparison of Nozzle and Throttling Control. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Interface Device for Axial and Radial Flow Impulse and Reaction Turbine (IFD-7) Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Turbine characteristics curves of reaction turbine. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Drainage and Seepage Tank (S-1) Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Verification of Darcy Law Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Plunger Pump Demonstration Unit (FM-53) Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Pump Characteristics Curves of Plunger Pump. The pressure-volume diagram and volume efficiency of plunger pump. Functional Arm Field, UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Basic Hydrology Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Investigation of rainfall-runoff relationship Functional ESSOM Thailand NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Casagrande Apparatus for Liquid Limit (Motorized) Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Liquid Limit of Soil Functional Controls Italy NA 3 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Casagrande Apparatus for Liquid Limit (Local) Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Liquid Limit of Soil Functional Local NA 17 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Cone Penetromenter for Liquid Limit Hydraulics Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Liquid Limit of Soil Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Plastic Limit Test Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Plastic Limit of Soil Functional Local NA 7 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Shrinkage Limit Test Apparatus (Volumetric) Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shrinkage Limit of Soil Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Shrinkage Limit Test Apparatus (Linear) Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shrinkage Limit of Soil Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pycnometer for Specific Gravity Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Specific Gravity Functional Local NA 10 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Standard Compaction Test Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Proctor Test Functional Local NA 10 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Modified Compaction Test Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Proctor Test Functional Local NA 10 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Soil Compactor (Local) Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Proctor Test Functional Local NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Sand Replacement Test Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Field Density Test Functional Local NA 3 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Sand Density Cone Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Field Density Test Functional Local NA 3 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Speedy Moisture Tester Local Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Field Moisture Test Functional Local NA 5 "Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Speedy Moisture Tester Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Field Moisture Test Functional Thomas Ash Worth and Co. NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Baloon Density Method Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Field Density Test Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Dynamic Con Penetrometer DCP Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Soil Stiffness Functional Local NA 2 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vane Shear Test Apparatus for Field Inspection Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) In-Situ Testing for Shear Strength Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Soil Auger Manual Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Soil Drilling Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Laboratory Oven 256 ltr Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To Dry Soil Samples Functional Memmert Germany NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Hot Plate 150 MM dia Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) To Heat Samples Functional Sayona NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Electric Density Gauge Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) In-Situ Density and Moisture of Soil Functional DGSI England NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Constant Head Permeability Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Soil Permeability Functional ZheJiang TuGongChina NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Falling Head Permeability Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Soil Permeability Functional ZheJiang TuGongChina NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Standard Penetration test SPT Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Soil Stiffness Functional Local NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Unconfined Test apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Compressive Strength and Undrained Shear Strength of Soil Functional ZheJiang TuGongChina NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Direct Shear test Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shear Strength of Soil Functional ZheJiang TuGongChina NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Consolidation apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Consolidation Test Functional ZheJiang TuGongChina NA 5 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Pocket Vane Shear Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) In-Situ Testing for Shear Strength Functional E285 NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Apparatus for relative density Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) TO FIND Relative density of cohesionless soils Functional ELE NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 4-Pin soil Resistivity Set Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Geophysical Testing for subsurface Soil Properties Functional Gilson NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Subsurface Seismic Testing Apparatus (with Cross hole testing) Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Geophysical Testing for subsurface Soil Properties Functional Sistronix NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Single Channel Memory Earth Resistivity and IP Meter Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Geophysical Testing for subsurface Soil Properties Functional AGI USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Old ELE Triaxial Complete Eqpt Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Functional ELE UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Rock Index App Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For Point Load Test Functional Impact UK NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Resonant Column System (Testing System) Including all accessories Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Resonance Frequency of Soil Functional GCTS USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A VJ Tech Shear Scan SS10 Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shear Strength of Soil Functional VJ Tech USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A VJ Tech Cyclic Triaxial Test System Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shear Strength of Soil in Dynamic State Functional VJ Tech USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Soil Compactor Automatic Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) for Proctor Test Functional YF FENG China NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Standard Penetration Test China (Rotary Rig Machine) Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) for Drilling in Rock Functional Local NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Unconfined Test Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Compressive Strength and Undrained Shear Strength of Soil Functional ZheJiang TuGongChina NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Direct Shear Test Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shear Strength of Soil Functional ZheJiang TuGongChina NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Menard Pressuremeter Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For In-situ Soil Properties e.g. Resiliance and Shear Modulus Functional Menard France NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Motorized Earth Auger Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For Drilling in Soil Functional Local NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Triax 50 Triaxial Test Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shear Strength of Soil Functional Controls Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High Speed Stirer Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For mixing of Soil in water solution Functional Controls Italy NA 2 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Earth Auger General with accessories Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For Drilling in Soil Functional General USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Little Beaver Earth Auger MDL 8HP Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) For Drilling in Soil Functional Little Beaver USA NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Triax 50 Triaxial Test Apparatus Geotech Lab,School Of Civil And Environmental Engineering (SCEE) Shear Strength of Soil Functional Controls Italy NA 1 Atif Mehmood +92-332-2777543 atifmehmood426@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) National Analytical Lab, Atta-Ur-Rahman School Of Applied Biosciences (ASAB) Quantification of metabolites / components Functional 1. 291N0031107A 2. ASALE00331 NA 2 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Sequencer Immunology Lab, Atta-Ur-Rahman School Of Applied Biosciences (ASAB) DNA Sequencing Functional Ser # 3067964 / 608450 NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Autoclaveable Fermenter Bio-Process Lab, Atta-Ur-Rahman School Of Applied Biosciences (ASAB) Fermentation of enzymes / bioproducts Functional Ser # J-2.0-RO1-16-19, Model: Jupiter 2.0 NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography (FPLC) Bio-Process Lab, Atta-Ur-Rahman School Of Applied Biosciences (ASAB) Protein purification Functional HBRVU-187.5 (Times Group Inc) NA 1 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Automotive Lab Portable Engine Gas Analyzer BK-892 Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional USA/Japan NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Board Engine Analyzer & Diagnostic BK-397-1055 Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional USA/Japan NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A DSP videoDevelopment Kit (STRATIX II Professional Edition) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional EP2S180 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Audio & Video development kit stratix II edition Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional EP4SGX230 NA 1 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A PCIE development kit Straix II edition Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional 2SGX90N NA 2 +92-51-90852136 Dr Hassan Aqeel Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Arria GX Development kit Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional DK-dev-1agx60n NA 2 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A MAX-II Development kit Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional 1270N NA 4 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Integrator(CM922T-XAI10) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional HBI-0100B NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A UP3 Education kit Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional IN-66044 NA 4 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Altera cyclone III FPGA starter kit DK-start-3c25n/p Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Signal Processing: FPGA Kit Functional DK-START-3c25n NA 12 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Integrator/ CM922T-XA10 core mdl Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / The integrator produces an output voltage that is both proportional to the amplitude and duration of the input signal Functional CM922T-XA10 NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Master Blaster with ribbon cable Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / the Master Blaster siren is only suitable for installations with a security or fire Functional 18-980047 NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 1.3 Mega pixel digital camera module Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation: Camera Module Functional TRDB_DC2 NA 3 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Altera DE 1 development and Education Board Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Design: FPGA Kit / Intel DE1 Development and Education board is to provide the ideal vehicle for advanced design prototyping in the multimedia, storage, and networking Functional 2C20 NA 2 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3.6 Inch digital panel development kit Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / FPGA starter development kit Functional SFG2110 NA 2 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A PCI Development kit card Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation Functional PCI NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Video Input Daughter Card Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation: Video Input Daughter Card Functional UG235 NA 3 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A FPGA Starter Development Kit (Cyclone II ) Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Digital Design: FPGA Kit Functional 2C20N NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A SNA-700 VHF/UHF/FM Active Antenna along Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / used for receiving good TV signals Functional SNA-700 NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Signal Amplifier Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / Used for amplification purpose Functional 20ESG4 NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A RIMS Advance Electronic Trainer Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation / To test different logic as well to implement different circuits which contain 7-segment display, variable power supply and relay switching circuit Functional DEV-2769 rims NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Digital Oscilloscope 100 MHz Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation: Digital Oscilloscope Functional DS1102E NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Syncronized Function Generator Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation: Function Generator Functional SFG2110 NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Dual Display Digital Multimeter Electronic System Design Automation Centre Lab, SEECS Instrumentation: Dual Display Digital Multimeter Functional GDM-8246 NA 1 Dr Hassan Aqeel +92-51-90852136 Hassan.aqeel@seecs.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Tayler Chassis Dynamometer with all accessories CM51 Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional USA/Japan NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Taylor Floor Type Engine Dynomemter with all accessories DX 33 Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional USA/Japan NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Taylor Laboratory Emission Analyzer 5 GasBK-392-2100 Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional USA/Japan NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A EFI System Analyzer for Gasoline/Diesel EngineEA-3000 Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional USA/Europe/Asia NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Launch Auto Scan Tool X-431 Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional USA/Europe/Asia NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Engine Test Bed ( TH01) Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional Malaysia NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Quartz Sensor Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional Kistler 6067C1 (Kistler) Quartz Sensor 250, Bar Dia =9.9 MM integrated 191 L+ l m Incl: 2x100A3 ,120,102 NA 5 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Thermo COMP , Quartz Sensor Automotive & Engine Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Engine Testing Equipment Functional Kistler 7061B1 Thermo COMP , Quartz Sensor 250 bar, M14x1.25 Integrated cable 1969 L+l m NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A CNC Lathe Machine CNC (Computer Numerical Control), School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Research / Demonstration / Commercial Functional Taiwan NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A CNC Vertical Milling Machine CNC (Computer Numerical Control), School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Research / Demonstration / Commercial Functional Intelitek USA MV-1060 CNC Vertical Milling Machine NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A FDM TITAN 3D Printer Rapid Prototyping Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Research / Demonstration / Commercial Functional Germany /UK NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3D Scanner VIVID-9i Konica Minolta Rapid Prototyping Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Research / Demonstration / Commercial Functional Germany /UK NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Faro ARM Platinum CMM Rapid Prototyping Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Research / Demonstration / Commercial Functional Germany /Japan NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A LPKF Proto mat H100 Control Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) For Printed Circuit Board (PCB) Manufacturing Functional LPKF LPKF Proto mat H100 with all Accessories NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A UV/Vis Spectrophotometer Bio Chemistry Lab, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Research / Demonstration Functional Medfield U.S.A NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk" National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Lathe Machine Length Machine Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional Manufacturing System Lathe Machine Length 750mm/1000mm, Swing Over Bed 358mm NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Surface Grinder Maximum Drilling Machine Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional China Surface Grinder Maximum Drilling ? (mm) Iron-50, Steel-45, Swivel Arm 360, Feed of Vertical 1.25 NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Shaper Machine Machine Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional China Shaper Machine MC (786/26) NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A CNC Wire cut Work Table Machine Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional China CNC Wire cut Work Table Size 756 x 366mm, Travel x, y, z 400 x 350mm cutting thickness NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A CNC EDM (Die Sinking) Table Machine Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional China CNC EDM (Die Sinking) Table Size 600 x 320mm, Model EDM 3132 NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vertical Milling Machine Table Machine Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional Vertical Milling Machine Table Size 254 x 1270mm, Model 35/34 (X63251/B) NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Radial Drill Machine Machine Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional Local NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Universal Milling Machine Machine Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional China Universal Milling Machine Model XQ6232WA, RPM 1300mm, 3Phase NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Spot Welding Rated Power 25KVA Welding and Fabrication Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional China Spot Welding Rated Power 25KVA, Maximum Welding Thickness of Low Carbon Steel 4 x 4mm, Cooling Tower Consumption 120 Liters/hr NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Arc welding Welding Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional Local NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Gas Welding Welding and Fabrication Shop, School Of Mechanical And Manufacturing Engineering (SMME) Manufacturing System Functional Local NA 1 Prof Riaz Mufti +92-51-9085605 riazmufti@smme.nust.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Universal Testing Machine Mechanical Testing Lab,School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Tensile test, compression test, bend test, shear test, peel test Functional Shimadzu AG-Xplus NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855215 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Universal Testing Machine (Tinius Olsen Supe) Mechanical Testing Lab,School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Tensile Test, Compression test Functional Tinius Olsen Super 602L NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855216 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Brinell Hardness Tester Mechanical Testing Lab,School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Used to find the hardness of unquenched metals and alloys, bulk hardness and hardness of ductile samples Functional Times Group Inc TH-600 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855217 Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Post Mortem Large animal (Test) Pathology Lab Post mortem Large animal (Heifer, Adult cattle, buffalo, Horse etc.) at PKR 500.00 NA NA Prof Dr. M. Tariq Javed CHAIRMAN -- Department of Pathology Univ. of Agri. Faisalabad National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Vickers Hardness Tester Mechanical Testing Lab,School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Used to measure the hardness of ferrous, non-ferrous, hard metals, carburized metals and chemical treated layers Functional HBRVU-187.5 (Times Group Inc) NA 2 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855218 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Micro Vickers Hardness Tester Mechanical Testing Lab,School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Used to measure the hardness of ferrous, non-ferrous, hard metals, carburized metals, chemical treated layers, thin films, membranes, plastics etc Functional 401/402 MVD (Wolpert) NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855219 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Rockwell hardness Tester Mechanical Testing Lab,School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Used to find the hardness of steel, aluminum and its alloys, malleable cast iron, copper alloys, quenched steels, tempered steels etc Functional SHR-150A(D) (Linear Sinowon) NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855220 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Metallurgical Microscope Microscopy Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Micro structual analysis, grain size, phase analysis, thin coating's thickness Functional Optika B 600-MET NA 7 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855221 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Polarized light microscope Microscopy Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Used to study natural and synthetic fibers, measurement of color absorption, refraction of light in isotropic and anisotropic materials Functional Olympus BX51-75A2P NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855222 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 3D Printer Microscopy Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Rapid prototyping, aided manufacturing, inexpensive tooling Functional Xlore 3D Proto NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855223 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Grinding and polishing system Sample Preparation Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Sample preparation for Metallography, SEM, XRD, Grinding, polishing Functional Metkon Forcipol 2V NA 3 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855224 University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Post mortem Large animal Pathology Lab Post mortem Medium size animals (Calf, Sheep, Goat, Deer, Pets etc.) Functional NA NA Prof. M. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Mob.: +92 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Post mortem Lab animals Pathology Lab Post mortem Lab animals (Rabbit, mice, rats, guinea pig ) at PKR 50 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Ph.: 0092 41 9200161-70/3120 Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Post mortem Pea fowl (Test) Pathology Lab Post mortem Pea fowl at PKR100.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Box Furnace Heat Treatment lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Thermal aging, ceramic sintering, thermal shock testing, metal heat treatment Functional Protherm PLF 140/9 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855225 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Tube Furnace Heat Treatment lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Thermal aging, ceramic sintering, thermal shock testing, metal heat treatment, Nitriding, carburizing, calcinations, synthesis Functional Protherm PTF 14/75/450 NA 2 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855226 University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Cage/pet Fancy birds P.M. or Consultancy (Test) Pathology Lab Cage/pet Fancy birds P.M. or Consultancy at cost PKR 100.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A X-Ray Powder Diffractometer X-Rays Diffraction, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Characterization of identification of unknown crystalline materials, lattice spacing, epitaxial growth of crystallites, thin films, nanomaterials Functional PANanalytical Stoe Theta-Theta NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855227 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Scanning Electron Microscope Scanning Electron Microscopy, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) 3D Images of topography, morphology, composition, failure analysis of materials, forensic investigation, medicine, soil and rock sampling biological science Functional JEOL-JASM 6490A NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855228 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A UV-visible Spectrometer Atomic Force Microscopy, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Quantitative and qualitative analysis of absorption, chemical kinetics, detection of impurities, drug analysis, molecular weight determination Functional Nalytikjena SPECORD 200 Plus NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855229 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Atomic Force Microscopy Atomic Force Microscopy, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Characterization of thin films, surface roughness, topology, identification of atoms Functional JEOL-JASM 5200 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855230 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A 2D Non-contact Optical Profilometer Surface Engg Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Step height of thin films, surface roughness and topography Functional Nanovea PS50 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855231 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Particle Size Analyzer Surface Engg Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Used to determine the particle size distribution Functional Horiba LA-920 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855232 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A BET Surface area and porosity Analyzer Surface Engg Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) BET and Langmuir Surface Area, porezise distribution, pore volume and isothermal plot Functional Micromeritics Gemini VII 239t NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855233 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Flame Photometer Chemistry Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Determination of Alkali & Alkaline earth metals in solution (ppm) from e.g. Na, K, U & Ca Functional S20-4 Spectrolab, UK NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855234 University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Histopathology (per tissue) Test/Service Pathology Lab Histopathology (per tissue) at cost PKR 450.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Blood smear for Parasites Pathology Lab Blood smear for Parasites at cost PKR 50.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Urine routine examination (Physical, sugar, protein, microscopy) Test Pathology Lab Urine routine examination (Physical, sugar, protein, microscopy) at cost PKR 150 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Fecal examination for parasites Test Pathology Lab Fecal examination for parasites at cost PKR 50.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Skin scrapings for parasites Test/Service Pathology Lab Skin scrapings for parasites at cost PKR 50.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A HI Antibody titers for ND (1-8 samples) Test/Service Pathology Lab HI Antibody titers for ND (1-8 samples) at cost PKR 400.00/50 per sample Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A HI Antibody titers for IB Test/Service Pathology Lab HI Antibody titers for IB at cost PKR. 150.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Salmonella pullorum Plate test Pathology Lab Salmonella Pullorum Plate test Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A MG Plate agglutination test Pathology Lab MG Plate agglutination test at cost PKR.250 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A MS Plate agglutination test Pathology Lab MS Plate agglutination test at cost PKR 300.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Culture Sensitivity test Pathology Lab Culture Sensitivity test at cost PKR 400.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Viable bacterial counts (Water, feed, feed ingredients) Test/Service Pathology Lab Viable bacterial counts (Water, feed, feed ingredients) at cost PKR 200.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Hatcher fluff Test Pathology Lab Hatcher fluff test (viable count) at cost PKR 500.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Environmental test for hatcheries (Bacterial, fungal contamination test, Swab testing) Test/Service Pathology Lab Environmental test for hatcheries (Bacterial, fungal contamination test, Swab testing) at cost PKR 150.00 Per plate used Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Coliform count Test/Service Pathology Lab Coliform count at cost PKR 300.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Mallein test Pathology Lab Mallein test at cost PKR.150.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Tuberculin test Pathology Lab Tuberculin test (Minimum 10 animals; Transportation will be provided by farmer at cost PKR. 200.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Brucella Rose Bengal test Pathology Lab Brucella Rose Bengal test at cost PKR. 100.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Serum total proteins Test/Service Pathology Lab Serum total proteins at cost PKR.100.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Serum albumin Test/Service Pathology Lab Serum albumin at cost PKR.100.00 Functional NA NA DR. M. TARIQ JAVED Chairman, Department of Pathology, Mob.: 0092 313 664 9834 Email: mtjaved@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Blood urea/BUN Test Pathology Lab Blood urea/BUN test ar cost PKR 100 Functional NA NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Creatinine Test Pathology Lab Creatinine Test Functional NA NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Blood sugar Test Pathology Lab Blood sugar Test at cost PKR. 100.00 Functional NA NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A SGOT (ALT) /SGPT (AST) Test Pathology Lab SGOT (ALT) /SGPT (AST) Test will be conducted at cost PKR.200 Functional NA NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A ALP Test/Service Pathology Lab Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in several tissues throughout the body. This test measures the level of ALP in the blood. It will conducted at cost PKR. 200 Functional NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Ca, P, Na, CL Test(s) Pathology Lab Ca for calcium, Na for Sodium , P for Phosphorus and, Potassium each test will be conducted at 100 PKR/test Functional NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Formalized liver homogenate (HPS autogenous vaccine) Pathology Lab FORMALIZED LIVER HOMOGENATE VACCINES AGAINST HYDROPERICARDIUM SYNDROME. VIRUS IN ... virus neutralization test conducted at cost 350.00 per 1000 doses Functional NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A HI Antibody titers for Al H7 (1-8 samples) Pathology Lab HI Antibody titers for Al H7 (1-8 samples) conducted at 600.00/75 per sample Functional NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A ELISA Test Pathology Lab ELISA Test for Detection of Antibodies against Infectious Bronchitis (IB) (Minimum 8 samples) Rs. 300/samples Functional NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A [Lisa Based Bovine Brucellosis Diagnosis Pathology Lab [Lisa Based Bovine Brucellosis Diagnosis (Minimum 8 samples) Rs. 300/samples Functional NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A PCR Based Diagnosis Pathology Lab PCR Based Diagnosis of Chicken Infectious Anemia Virus (CIAV) at cost PKR 2500.00 PCR Based Diagnosis of Infectious Laryngiotracheitis (ILT) virus at cost PKR 2500.00 PCR Based Diagnosis of Bovine Brucellosis at cost PKR2500.00 PCR Based Diagnosis of Marek's disease at cost PKR 2500.00 PCR Based Diagnosis of Avian Lymphoid Leukosis at cost PKR 2500.00 PCR Based Diagnosis of Avian Adenovirus Infection at cost PKR 2500.00 PCR Based Diagnosis of Avian Salmonellosis at cost PKR 2500.00 PCR Based Diagnosis of Bovine Tuberculosis at cost PKR 2500.00 PCR Based Diagnosis of Bovine Para tuberculosis at cost PKR 2500.00 Functional NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A RT PCR for IBV Pathology Lab RT PCR for IBV (Infectious Bronchitis) Functional RT PCR for IBV (Infectious Bronchitis) NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A ELisa Based Bovine Tuberculosis Diagnosis Pathology Lab ELisa Based Bovine Tuberculosis Diagnosis (Minimum 8 samples) Rs. 300/samples 300.00 Functional ELisa Based Bovine Tuberculosis Diagnosis (Minimum 8 samples) NA NA Prof Dr. Tariq Javed Chairman Department of Pathology Phone: 92-41-2615844 Email: javedmt@gmail.com National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Refractometre Chemistry Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Determine the refractive index of semi solids (membrane, thin films), liquid samples and Brix scale of refractometer, measures the weight percentage of sugar contained in a water solution according to ICUMSA standard Functional Dr-A1 ATAGO, Japan NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855235 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Rotary Evaporator Chemistry Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Rotary evaporator is used for the efficient & gentle removal of solvents from samples through evaporation Functional Laborota Efficient 4000 HEIDOLPH, Germany NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855236 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A pH Meter Chemistry Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) pH meter is used to measure hydrogen-ion activity (acidity of alkalinity) in a solution Functional Mi-160 Martini Instruments, Italy NA 3 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855237 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Conductivity / Total dissolved solid (TDS) Meter Chemistry Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) This instrument is used to measure the electrical conductivity in a solution. Normally it is used for the analysis of water to monitor the amount of nutrients, salts and impurities Functional 4510 JENWAY, UK NA 3 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855238 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Melting Point Apparatus Chemistry Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Melting point apparatus is used to determine the melting point of solids as the melting point of a material is important for understanding its behavior and application as well as ensuring its quality and safe use Functional SMP3 Stuart, UK NA 2 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855239 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Viscosity Meter Chemistry Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Measures the viscosity of Newtonian fluids at different rpms using the spindles Functional DV-E, DV-II+Pro Brook Field, UK NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855240 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Refrigerated Table Top Centrifuge Chemistry Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Centrifuge machine separates the materials / liquids that have different weights Functional Z366 K, HERMLE Germany NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855241 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Thermogravimetric (TG) / Differential Thermal Analyzer (DTA) Thermal Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Used to determine Thermal and kinetic properties of sample Functional Diamond TG/DTA Pyris1 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855242 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Bomb Calorimeter Thermal Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) To determine the enthalpy of combustion of hydrocarbons and solid fuels (coal) Functional Koehler K88890 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855243 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Gel Permeation Chromatography Thermal Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Polymer characterization. Molecular weight calculation Functional VE-2001 GPC max NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855244 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Rheometer Thermal Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Calculation of viscosity of polymer Rheological study of polymers Functional Reologia NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855245 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Fourier Transform Infrared Radiation (FTIR) Chemical Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) To identify functional groups. To gather information about chemical bonds and molecular structure of a materials Functional Spectrum 100 (Perkin Elmer) NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855246 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) Chemical Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Qualitative analysis, Quantitative analysis, Purification of components Functional Perkin Elmer Series 200 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855247 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Gas Chromatography (GC) /Mass Chromatography (MS) Chemical Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) For the identification of unknown organic samples Functional Clarus 500 Mass Spectrometer NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855248 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Elemental Analyzer Chemical Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) For determination of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen content in organic and other types of materials Functional EuroVector Euro AE 3000 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855249 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Micro Calorimeter Chemical Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) To measure reaction kinetics, thermal properties and aging of organic / inorganic samples Functional TAM-III, 4 Channel NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855250 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Velocity of detonation (VOD) Meter Chemical Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Determine the efficiency of blast performed. Velocity of detonation helps to find strength and performance of the explosive Functional Explomet-fo-2000 NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855251 National University of Science and Technology (NUST) N/A Double Beam UV-VIS Spectrophotometer Chemical Analysis Lab, School Of Chemical And Material Engineering (SCME) Used to determine the absorption of light from a sample. Can be used as a detector for HPLC. Can determine the concentration of a compound or particles in a solution or suspension. Used in physical and analytical chemistry to identity and quantify information about the atoms and molecules Functional Analytik Jena SPECORD 200 Plus NA 1 Dr Aftab Akram ftabakram@scme.nust.edu.pk +92-51-90855252 University of Punjab, Lahore N/A FISH (TEST) CENTER OF EXCELLENCE IN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY Gene integration Functional NA NA NA 1 PROF. DR. AHMAD ALI SHAHID +92-42-35293127 sao@cemb.edu.pk Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Gas Chromatogram-Mass Spectrometer (GC-MS) Environmental Sciences Composition Analysis (After Solvent Extraction and Purification Standard Protocol Method) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) Environmental Sciences Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis (Standard Protocol Method) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Thermal Gravimetric Analysis Environmental Sciences Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis (Standard Protocol Method) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Ellipsometer Environmental Sciences Measurement of Thickness of Thin Films Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) Environmental Sciences Element Analysis (Pb, Cd, Zn, Ni, Cr, Cu, Ca, Na, K, Mg, AI, Fe, Mn, Sn, Si, Co, V) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Vapor Generation Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (VGAAS) Environmental Sciences Element Analysis (Hg, As) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Flame Photometer Environmental Sciences Element Analysis (Na, K, Li, Ba, Ca) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Fourier Transform Infra-Red Spectrophotometer (FT-IR / ATR) Environmental Sciences Functional Group Analysis (KBr Pellets / Thin Film / Loose powder method on ATR) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A UV-Visible Spectrophotometer Environmental Sciences Quantitative/ Qualitative Analysis (Photometric) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A UV-Visible Spectrophotometer (Spectrum mode) Environmental Sciences Quantitative/ Qualitative Analysis (Spectrum mode) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A PCR Machine Environmental Sciences Amplification and Quantification of DNA (Quantitative PCR methods) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Oven (Memmert) Environmental Sciences Moisture Removal/Drying of Sample (Standard Protocol method) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Deionizer (ELGA) Environmental Sciences Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Anti-Fungal Activity (Test/ Analytical Facility) Environmental Sciences Standard Protocol for the study of anti-fungal activity of newly synthesized Compounds Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Microbial Analysis Environmental Sciences Standard Protocols for the estimation and identification of different bacteria in water samples Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Biomass Production (Analytical Faciliy) Environmental Sciences Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Viscometer Environmental Sciences Measurement of Viscosity of Fluids Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Hygrometer Environmental Sciences Measurement of moisture in soil samples Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Anemometer Environmental Sciences Measurement of Wind Speed Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Microtome Environmental Sciences To Cut biological specimens into very thin segments for microscopic examination. Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A High Volume Air Samples Environmental Sciences Air Sampling for PM and Heavy Metal Analysis Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Vapour Pressure Osmometer Environmental Sciences Measurement of Molar Mass of Polymers Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Rotary Evaporator Environmental Sciences Efficient and gentle removal of solvents from samples by evaporation Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Spirometer Environmental Sciences Measurement of Breath (for Pulmonary Function Tests) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Orbital Sieve Shaker Environmental Sciences Soil Texture Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Microscope with Digital Camera Environmental Sciences For Cell Sections with Images Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Carbon monoxide Meter Environmental Sciences Measurement of Carbon dioxide Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A pH / ORP / DO / EC / TDS Meter Environmental Sciences Measurement of pH / ORP / DO / EC / TDS in soil and Water Samples Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Fluoride Ion Selective Electrode Meter Environmental Sciences Measurement of Fluoride in soil and Water Samples Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Hot Plate Environmental Sciences Heating Temp Range upto 350 degreedegree celsius Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Fume Hood Environmental Sciences Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Vaccuum Oven Environmental Sciences Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Autoclave Environmental Sciences Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Incubator Environmental Sciences Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Laminar Flow Environmental Sciences Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Fatima Jinnah Women University FJWU, Rawalpindi(FJWU) N/A Electrical Balance Environmental Sciences Weighing Capacity upto 0.0001g Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Uzaira Rafique environmentsci@fjwu.edu.pk +92-51-9292900 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A DNA-Sequencer MOLECULAR BIOLOGY AND GENETIC LABORATORY DNA Sequencing Reaction (Unidirectional) DNA Sequencing with Ethanol Precipitation Fragment STR Genotyping Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Smart Cyclers/Real Time PCR MOLECULAR BIOLOGY AND GENETIC LABORATORY HBV DNA Qualitative, HBV DNA Quantitative, HCV RNA Qualitative, HCV RNA Quantitative, HCV Genotype, HDV RNA Qualitative, HDV RNA Quantitative Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Ikaros,Karyotpying System MOLECULAR BIOLOGY AND GENETIC LABORATORY Human Karyotyping Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Shearwave Elastography ELASTOGRAPHY UNIT Liver, Breast, Thyroid, Kidneys & Prostate Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Modular (Roche) Department of Patholgy 24 Hr. Urinary Protein, CSF Protein, Ferritin, Fluid for Amylase, Free Prostate Specific Antigan (Free PSA), Glucose Challenge Test (G.C.T), L.F.Ts (3 para), L.F.Ts (4 Para), L.F.Ts (5 para), Serum IgE, Serum Total, Protein, Urinary Creatinine, Urine Creatinine (Spot), 24 hrs Urine for Urea, FSH (Follicle Stimulating Hormone) HBe Antigen, PRO BNP, Urine Protein (Spot), Alkaline Phosphatase, Bilirubin (D&I), Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN), Cardiac Enzymes Profile, Creatinine (Urine), Creatinine Clearance, CSF for LDH, Fluid for LDH, Gamma GT, GCT (GLucose Challenge Test), Glucose Tolerance Test (GTT), HDL-Cholesterol, L.F.Ts (6 Para), LDL-Cholesterol, Lipid Profile, Liver Function Tests, Plasma Glucose Fasting, Plasma Glucose Random, Protein AG Ratio, Serum Albumin, Serum Amylase, Serum Beta HCG, Serum Bilirubin (Direct), Serum, Bilirubin (Total), Serum Calcium, Serum Cholestrol, Serum CKMB, Serum CPK, Serum Creatinine, Serum LDH, Serum Magnesium, Serum Phosphorus (Inorganic), Serum Total Lipids, Serum Uric Acid, SGOT, SGPT, Total Protien, Triglycerides, Urea (Blood), Urea (Urine), Vitamin D (Total), Alpha Feto Protien, Anti Streptolysin O, CA 15-3, CA-125, CA19-9, Carcino Embryonic Antigen(CEA), C-Reactive Protein, Estradiol/Estrogen, Ferritin, Free T3, Free T4, LH, Prolactin, PSA, Rhematoid Factor Titre, Serum Folate Serum Folate (Folic Acid), Serum Insulin, Serum Iron, Serum TIBC,T3, T4,Testosterone, Thyroid Profile, TSH, Urine Micro albumin, Vitamin B12, Vitamin D3 Level. Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Architect Abbott i 2000 SR Department of Patholgy Free Prostate Specific Antigan (Free PSA), H.I.V. (MEIA), CMV (IgM), HBe Antigen, Rubella IgG, Rubella IgM Toxoplasma Antibody (IGG), Toxoplasma Antibody (IGM), Vitamin D (Total), Vitamin D3 Level, CMV (IgG),HBsAg HbA1C (Glycosylated HB), T3, T4, Thyroid Profile, TSH, Torch Profile, Hepatitis C Virus Antibody Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Nova 4 (C.E.P) Department of Patholgy Serum Electrolytes, Sodium, Serum Potassium, Serum Chloride, Serum Bicarbonate Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Coobas E411 Department of Patholgy Serum Electrolytes, Sodium, Serum Potassium, Serum Chloride, Serum Bicarbonate Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A ELASTOGRAPHY UNIT Department of Patholgy Progesterone, Anti HBc IgM, Anti HBc Total, Anti HbeAb, Anti HBs Ab, Cortisol (Urine), Hepatitis B Profile, Hepatitis B Antibody, Hepatitis B Core IgM, Serum Cortisol (Evening), Serum Cortisol (Morning) Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Immulate Department of Patholgy Helicobacter Pylori IGG Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Sysmax / XN 1000 Department of Patholgy Absolute Eosinophil Count, CBC ESR Profile, CBC Profile, Haemoglobin%, Haemoglobin/ Haematocrit, Platelet Count Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Cobas Taqman 48 (Roche) Department of Patholgy Cobas Taqman 48 (Roche) Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Dirui H 500 (Hospicare Sys) Department of Patholgy Urine for Albumin, Urine for Free Hemoglobin, Urine Sugar, Urine DR, Ketone Bodies Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Varriant II(HPLC Bio Rad) Department of Patholgy Hb ELECTROPHORESIS Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Sysmex CA- 50 Department of Patholgy Prothrombine Time Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A BACTEC 9050 Department of Patholgy Blood Culture & Sensivity Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Perform By Manualy Department of Patholgy Abscess drainage Fluid for C/S, Abscess drainage Fluid Gram Stain, Abscess Fluid for Examination Acid Fast Bacilli Smear, Aqueous Tap for C/S, Aqueous Tap for Cytology, Aqueous Tap for Examination Aqueous Tap for Gram Staining, Ascitic Fluid DR, Ascitic Fluid Cytology, Ascitic Fluid for AFB, Ascitic Fluid for C/S, Ascitic Fluid for Gram Staining, Ascitic Fluid for ZN Staining, Aspiration Fluid for C/S, Aspiration Fluid for Cytology, Aspiration Fluid for Examination, Bone Biopsy, Bone Marrow Biopsy, Bone Marrow Culture Buccal Smear for C/S, Buccal Smear for Cytology, Cervical Smear Cytology, Dervix Swab for C/S, Corneal Scrapping for C/S, CSF for C/S, CSF for Cytology, Cyst Fluid Examination, Cyst Fluid for C/S, Cyst Fluid for Cytology, Dengue IgG/ IgM, Dengue Virus Rapid Test IgM/IgG, ER, ER & PR, ER/PR + HER-2, Gasteric Aspiration for AFB, High Vaginal Smear Cytology, HVS Culture & sensivity, Liver Abscess Examination Liver Abscess for C/S, Nail Scrapping for Fungus, Pericardial Fluid Examination, Pericardial Fluid for C/S Pericardial Fluid for Cytology, Pericardial fluid for Gram Stain, Peritoneal Fluid Examination, Peritoneal Fluid for C/S, Peritoneal Fluid for Cytology, Peritoneal fluid for ZN Stain, Pleural fluid Cytology, Pleural Fluid for C/S Pleural Fluid for ZN Stain, PR, Pus Culture & Sensivity, Pus for AFB, Pus for Cytology, Pus for Examination Pus for Gram stain, Pus for ZN Stain, Sputum For AFB, Sputum For C/S, Sputum For Cytology, Sputum for Examination, Sputum for Gram Staining, Sputum for ZN Stain, Stool Culture & Sensivity, Stool for Cytology Swab for C/S, Swab for Gram Staining, Synovial Fluid Examination, Synovial Fluid for C/S, Throat Swab Culture, throat Swab Gram staining, Urine Cytology, Wound Swab for C/S, Urine Culture & Sensitivity Cervical Smear Cytology, Culture & Sensivity, Cytology (Malignant Cells), FNAC(Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology), Bone Trephine, Fungus Smear, Gram Staining, Barr bodies (Buccal smear) ESR, FLUID DR, ICT Malaria, Malarial Parasite, Mantoux Test, Pleural Fluid DR, C.S.F. DR, Clotting Time Reticulocyte Count, Semen Analysis, Z.N. Stain, AFB Smear, HbsAg Device Method, Anti dsDNA, Fluid DR HER-2, Bleeding Time, Blood Group RH, Bone Marrow Examination, Bone Terphine Examination Stool DR, Stool Occult Blood, Stool Reducing Sugar, T.B Rapid Test, Typhidot, Urine Pregnancy Test Anti Nuclear Antibody, Anti HCV Device Method, VDRL(Syphilis), Widal Test, HIV Device, Serum tTransglutaminase-IgA, Serum tTransglutaminase-IgG, Dengue Antigen Rapid Test, Prothrombine Time, APTT, Anti Cardiolipin - IGG, Anti Cardiolipin - IGM, Anti HDV, Coombs Test (Direct) Coombs Test (Indirect), Rh Antibody Titre Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences (LUMHS), Jamshoro(LUMHS) N/A Histopathology Department of Patholgy Small Biopsy, Large Biopsy Functional N/A 1 DIRECTOR Muhammad Ali Bohyo ibt@lumhs.edu.pk +92-22-9213308 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A Chemical Test Parameters (Testing Services) Institute of Biological, Biochemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences pH, Total Dissolved solid (ppm), Conductivity Functional NA 1 Mir Shahid Ali Admin Officer, IBBPS 0321-2638978 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A Elements Detection (Tesing Services) Institute of Biological, Biochemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences Nitrite, Chloride, Sulfate, Sodium, Potassium, Magnesium, Calcium, Arsenic, Chlorine, fluoride Functional NA 1 Mir Shahid Ali Admin Officer, IBBPS 0321-2638978 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A Water Chemical Testing Institute of Biological, Biochemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences Heavy metal by Kits method (Lead, Chromium. Cadmium, Arsenic, Nitrite, Chloride, Sulphate, Sodium,Potassium ,Magnesium, Calcium, Arsenic, Chlorine,fluoride) Functional NA 1 Mir Shahid Ali Admin Officer, IBBPS 0321-2638978 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A Steroid Testing Services Institute of Biological, Biochemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences Cortisone, Hydrocortisone, Prednisolone, Dexamethasone Steriod test with above four parameters Functional NA 1 Mir Shahid Ali Admin Officer, IBBPS 0321-2638978 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A Iodine Testing Institute of Biological, Biochemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences Detection of Iodine in table salts Functional NA 1 Mir Shahid Ali Admin Officer, IBBPS 0321-2638978 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A Pharmaceutical Drug Testing Institute of Biological, Biochemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences Disintegration test ,Dissolution test, Friability Test , Hardness lest, Weight variation, Drug Assay Functional NA 1 Mir Shahid Ali Admin Officer, IBBPS 0321-2638978 University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Comparative Dissolution Test Institute of Biological, Biochemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences Dissolution test (Analysis by UV Spectrophotometer) Dissolution test (Analysis by HPLC) Functional NA 1 Mir Shahid Ali Admin Officer, IBBPS 0321-2638978 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A BA/BE study (Bioequivalence study single molecule) Institute of Biological, Biochemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences Bioequivalence study single molecule Functional NA 1 Mir Shahid Ali Admin Officer, IBBPS 0321-2638978 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Avance NEO International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) PROTON Experiment, 13C- NMR Experiment, Broad Band Decoupled Spectrum, 13C-NMR(DEPT-90 and DEPT-135), OFF-RESONANCE SPECTRUM, Inverse NMR Measurements HMBC , HMQC, HSQC,etc, HYBRID NMR SPECTROSCOPY, Homonuclear 20 Experiments COSY, NOESY, TOCSY, DOSY, ROESY, 20 INADEQUATE ,J-RES. X-J-RES, NOE Difference, 1-D SELECTIVE COSY, NOESY,TOCSY Avance NEO 300/400/500/600 MHz NMR Spectrometer NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A BRUKER,Vector-22 International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) IR Spectrum (FTIR) Functional Vector-22 NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A SHIMADZU, GC-17A International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) Gas Chromatographic Analysis Functional GC-17A NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A JASCO, International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) CD Spectrum Functional J-810 NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A PERKIN ElMER, 2400 International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) C.H.N. Micro analysis Functional NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A JASCO, P-2000 International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) Optical Rotation Functional P-2000 NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A JEOL- JMS-600H International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) EI, Positive Mode Functional JMS-600H NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Thermo finnigan- MAT-95XP International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) HR-EI Positive Mode Functional MAT-95XP NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Agilent -GCMS International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) GCMS-EI, Positive Mode, Full Scan Functional Agilent -GCMS Triple Quad, Agilent GCMS Single Quad NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A JEOL JMS-HX110 International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) FAB-HR (Peak Matching) Positive/ Negative Functional JMS-HX110 NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Bruker Maxis II International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) ESI-HR-MS, Positive/ Negative, ESI-HR-MSMS, Positive/ Negative Functional NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Bruker Maxis II (Bruker Amazon Speed) International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) LCMS-ESI, Positive/ Negative, Full Scan Functional Bruker Maxis II (Bruker Amazon Speed) NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Bruker Ultraflex iii International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) MALDI, Positive/ Negative Functional NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Nikon Eclipse TE 2000-E International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) DIC,Bright Field and Phase Contrast Microscopy and Image Capturing, Florescent Microscopy and Image Capturing Functional Inverted Microscope NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Nikon Eclipse 90i (Upright microscope) International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) Florescent Microscopy and Image capturing Functional Upright microscope NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Incubators International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) Antibacterial, Anti fungal, Brine-shrimp Lethality, Phytotoxicity, Insecticidal Functional Class II Safety Cabinet, Autoclave, Hot air oven, water bath, Microscope, Eliza Reader,Growth Chamber NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Luminar Flow Hood International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) Leishmanicidal Functional Luminar Flow Hood, centrifuge (K280R),Cold Incubator, compound NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Netted Wooden Cages Beakers International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) Dengue Mosquito Vector Assay Functional NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Luminometer (Labsystem LuminoSkan) International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) Immunomodulatory Activity (Antiinflammatory Assay) Functional NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 HEJ University of Karachi, Karachi(KU) N/A Spectrophotometer Spectramax M5e/ (multiscan) International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) Cytotoxic (3T cell Line) Activity, Anticancer Activity (Prostate Cancer)(PC3 Cell Line), Anticancer Activity(Cervical Cancer)(Hela Cell line), Iron Chelating Assay ,DPPH Radical Scavenging Assay Functional NA 1 Dr. Humaira Zafar Assistant Professor +92-21-99261701 University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Gene gun Institute of Agricultural Sciences Gene Transformation to callus Functional NA 1 Dr. Rashid Mahmood Mobile: 0344-7079236, rashid.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Real time PCR Institute of Agricultural Sciences DNA quantification/expression analysis Functional NA 1 Dr. Rashid Mahmood Mobile: 0344-7079236, rashid.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Fungal Culture Bank Institute of Agricultural Sciences About 1500 fungal cultures are available for sale. Services for identification of unknown fungal species Functional NA 1 Dr. Rashid Mahmood Mobile: 0344-7079236, rashid.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Soil and Water Analytical Services Institute of Agricultural Sciences Facility to analyze soil and irrigation water samples. Functional NA 1 Dr. Rashid Mahmood Mobile: 0344-7079236, rashid.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A VU/Vis Spectrophotometer Institute of Agricultural Sciences Spectrophotometry Functional NA 1 Dr. Rashid Mahmood Mobile: 0344-7079236, rashid.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Drying Oven Institute of Agricultural Sciences Sample Drying Functional NA 1 Dr. Rashid Mahmood Mobile: 0344-7079236, rashid.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Flame Photometer Institute of Agricultural Sciences Flame Photometry Functional NA 1 Dr. Rashid Mahmood Mobile: 0344-7079236, rashid.iags@pu.edu.pk University of Punjab, Lahore N/A Sohxlet apparatus complete assembly with all accessories Institute of Agricultural Sciences Crude fat determination in food and feed samples. Functional NA 1 Dr. Rashid Mahmood Mobile: 0344-7079236, rashid.iags@pu.edu.pk National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A LC-MS/MS NIBGE Research Facilities Thermo Electron Corporation Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Gas Chromatogram-Mass Spectrometer (GC-MS) NIBGE Research Facilities Thermo Electron Corporation Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) NIBGE Research Facilities JEOL, Japan Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Characterization of nanomaterials NIBGE Research Facilities AFM Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Electrochemical Characterization NIBGE Research Facilities PGSTAT Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Mass-sensitive sensing properties NIBGE Research Facilities QCM200 Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Conductance/Resistance Measurements NIBGE Research Facilities LCR Meter Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer NIBGE Research Facilities Metal analysis Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Elemental Analyzer, High temperature furnace & Bomb Calorimeter NIBGE Research Facilities Coal analysis (ultimate and proximate) Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Bomb Calorimeter NIBGE Research Facilities Calorific Value (CV) of organic samples Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A High temperature furnace NIBGE Research Facilities Ash, moisture and fixed carbom analysis of organic samples Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Faisalabad(NIBGE) N/A Surface Area analyzer NIBGE Research Facilities Surface area and porosity measurement Functional NA 1 Dr. Shahid Mansoor +92-41-2651471 shahidmansoor7@gmail.com Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology PINSTECH, Islamabad(PINSTECH) N/A Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) Central Analytical Facility Division (CAFD) 1-Quantitative determination of metals & non metals (P,S, Si, B) at ppm level in water (drinking, waste, processed , bottled mineral & municipal water ), geological materials ,food ,whole blood, serum, plant materials, biological & clinical, environmental samples. 2-Characterization of materials: metals, alloys ,Nano materials , high tech materials, Industrial chemicals, raw materials, finished products . 3-Quantitative determination of lanthanides (REEs) in ores and minerals 4-Soil Absorption ratio Functional NA 1 Mrs. Farhat Waqar, 051-9248772, farhat@pinstech.org.pk Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology PINSTECH, Islamabad(PINSTECH) N/A Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer Time Of Flight ICP-TOF MS Central Analytical Facility Division (CAFD) Quantitative determination of metals &non metals (P,S, Si, B) at ppb & ppm level and their iso -topic ratios in water (all types), food, whole blood, serum, plant materials, biological & clinical and environmental samples . Functional NA 1 Mrs. Farhat Waqar, 051-9248772, farhat@pinstech.org.pk Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology PINSTECH, Islamabad(PINSTECH) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS) Central Analytical Facility Division (CAFD) 1-Quantitative determination of toxic and trace metals at ppm &ppb level in food, whole blood, serum, and plant materials, biological, clinical and environmental samples. 2-Wear metals in lubricating oils Functional NA 1 Mrs. Farhat Waqar, 051-9248772, farhat@pinstech.org.pk Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology PINSTECH, Islamabad(PINSTECH) N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography with conductivity detector (HPLC IC) Central Analytical Facility Division (CAFD) Quantitative determination of anions at ppm level ( Fluoride, Chloride, Nitrate, Nitrite, Bromide, Sulphate, Phosphate, Carbonate, Bicarbonate Ammonium) In drinking, waste, processed, bottled mineral &municipal water Functional NA 1 Mrs. Farhat Waqar, 051-9248772, farhat@pinstech.org.pk Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology PINSTECH, Islamabad(PINSTECH) N/A Biological parameters in water Central Analytical Facility Division (CAFD) Ecoli, Total coliform Functional NA 1 Mrs. Farhat Waqar, 051-9248772, farhat@pinstech.org.pk Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology PINSTECH, Islamabad(PINSTECH) N/A Physical parameters in water Central Analytical Facility Division (CAFD) pH, Electrical conductivity, Total dissolved solids, ,Hardness, Total suspended solids, Alkalanity, Co2, residual and total chlorine, turbidity Functional NA 1 Mrs. Farhat Waqar, 051-9248772, farhat@pinstech.org.pk Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology PINSTECH, Islamabad(PINSTECH) N/A Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometer(GC-MS) Central Analytical Facility Division (CAFD) 1-Pesticides/Herbicides Functional NA 1 Mrs. Farhat Waqar, 051-9248772, farhat@pinstech.org.pk Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology PINSTECH, Islamabad(PINSTECH) N/A Gas Chromatography-ECD and HPLC UV GC-FID,ECD Central Analytical Facility Division (CAFD) 1-Pesticides/Herbicides 2-Purity of organic solvents Functional NA 1 Mrs. Farhat Waqar, 051-9248772, farhat@pinstech.org.pk University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) Centralized Resource Laboratories Microscopic Imaging Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX) with SEM Centralized Resource Laboratories Elemental Composition of solid samples Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Universal Testing Machine (UTM) Centralized Resource Laboratories Mechanical Analysis Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A X-ray Diffractometer (XRD) Centralized Resource Laboratories Crystallography (Per Hour)* Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Gold, Silver and Platinum Coating Centralized Resource Laboratories Surface coating (5 samples) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Carbon, Aluminum Coating Centralized Resource Laboratories Surface coating (5 samples) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS) Centralized Resource Laboratories Acetylene Flame Nitrous Oxide Flame Graphite furnace Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research(PCSIR Lahore) N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) Centralized Resource Laboratories Simple mobile phase Complex mobile phase Acetonitrile mobile phase Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Gas Chromatography Centralized Resource Laboratories Nitrogen Mobile Phase (TCD & FID, FPD & ECD) Helium Mobile Phase (TCD & FID ,FPD & ECD) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Thermogravimetric /Differential Thermal Analysis (TG/DTA) Centralized Resource Laboratories Operative at Up to 600C & Above 600C per 100C Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer (DMA) Centralized Resource Laboratories Mechanical Analysis Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Imitaz Ahmad, Director patwar2001@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A XRD Central Research Lab Powder Crystal Functional Powder Crystal NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Coating Unit Central Research Lab Thermal Coating Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Rotary Evaporator Central Research Lab 0-5 liters under vacuum Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Atomic Absorption Central Research Lab 25 Metals Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Freeze Dryer Central Research Lab 50ml Falcon tubes Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A UV-Visible Central Research Lab Double beam, Range: 190nm-1100nm Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Gas chromatography Central Research Lab FID/TCD, Capillary Injector Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography - HPLC Central Research Lab Binary gradient, UV detector, Manual Injection Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Furnace Central Research Lab High temperature Muffle Furance upto 1500C Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Solar Simulator Central Research Lab IV Characterization Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Vickers Hardness Tester Central Research Lab Measuring Hardness of Samples Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Spin Coater Central Research Lab Thin Film Coating Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Dip Coater Central Research Lab Thin Film Coating Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Ball Milling Machine Central Research Lab For milling of powder up to nano particles Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A MPI TS2000 Series probe station EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Production reliability 1) Designed for 24/7 production reliability 2) Integrated passive vibration isolation table 3) Optional active vibration isolation base 4) Ready for temperature ambient to 300 C Ergonomic Design and Options 1) Designed with easy single wafer front loading 2) Large Probe Platen supporting up to 12x DC or 4x DC + 4x RF Micro Positioners or standard 4.5 3) Probe card holder 4) Available with various chuck options and wide range of accessories such as 4.5" probe card adaptor, DC/RF Micro Positioners, microscopes to support various application requirement Functional Designed for wide variety of on-Wafer Production Applications 1) DC-IV / DC-CV / Pulsed-IV applications. 2) RF applications up to 67 GHz & 4-port setup. 3) High Power production application up to 10 kV / 600 A. 4) IC Design validation from ambient to 300 C . NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Fine Wire Bonder G5 Single EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Key Features 1) Working area:10x 6, z-axis 1.57" 2) Mechatronic bond head: gold ball 3) G5 64000 (fine wire) 45, 60 4) Wire: Au, Al, fine wire 17 m to 75 m 5) Transducer frequency: 55 to 167 kHz, 6) Ultrasonic frequency: digital 30-250 kHz 7) Speed: 3 wires/sec Functional F&K DELVOTEC MODEL G5 64000 10" X 6", 40mm Z-stroke, Single Rotary Head Bonder - Automatic single rotary headed fine aluminum wire bonder with manual unheated work holder NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Compressed Dry Air (CDA) System EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional Max. Eff. Working Pressure: 10 bar. Free Air Delivery at 10 bar: 5.6 l/s (0.34m /min). Installed Motor Power: 3.7KW. For Connection to : 380-420v/3Ph/50Hz. Mean Sound Level: 573dB(A) . Line Filters : DD/PD-10+. Tank Capacity: 270 Liters. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Glue Dispensing Robot EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional Dimensions: 45 cm x 45 cm x 20 cm. Minimum step: 100 m. Speed control: 1 - 35 mm/s. Z-axis limit: 4.5 cm. Control electronics: Arduino based. GUI / coding: Open Builds control / G- code. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Vacuum Glue Mixer EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1)Multi-functional dial / button for quick and easy programme selection and programming 2) Homogeneous and consistent, reproducible mixtures with optimum parameters Quick access to all mixing . 3) parameters: Mixing duration, speed, direction of rotation, interval times, pre-mixing, pre-vacuum, post-acuum and program name . 4) Patented mixing blade geometry. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Glue Dispenser EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1) Programmable dispensing speed: Regular and smooth linear movement. 2) Consistent volumetric dispensing: Compensate for variations in viscosity. 3) Patented system: No separation of complex fluids Ultra-precise deposits: Minimum volume is going until 100 nano liters . 4) strong push: Pushing capacity is going higher than 500,000 cps . 5) Ergonomic design: Weights less than 100gr. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Switch Matrix Crate 707B EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1) 707B mainframe controls up to six 812 matrix cards . 2) Compatible with the popular plug-in cards designed for the 707A/708A mainframes . 3) Support for both remote (via LXI, USB, and GPIB interfaces) and manual (via front panel) programming. 4) Integrates seamlessly with the Model 4200-SCS for semiconductor I-V and C-V characterization via GPIB interface. 5) Stores hundreds of switching configurations and channel patterns in non-volatile memory for reuse . 6) LXI interface supports remote programming and control. 7) Embedded TSP processor and TSP-Link Technology interface make it easy to integrate Series 2600B System Source Meter SMU instruments into a high speed, self-contained tester. 8) 14 bits of digital I/O NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Chiller EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1) Working temperature: (min.-10 C, max.40 C). 2) Ambient temperature: (min. 5 C, max. 40 C). 3) Temperature stability: (0.5 K). 4) Filling volume: (min. 7 L, max. 14 L). 5) Power consumption: (1.15 kW). 6) Interface(s): RS-232. 7) Noise level: 59 dB(A). 8) Display resolution: 0.1 C. 9) Pump pressure: (max.1.3 bar). 10) Pump flow max.(pressure): (35 L/min). NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Vacuum Pump EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1) 100% oil-free transfer. 2) Pure transferring, evacuation and compression of gases. 3) Version for slightly aggressive or corrosive gases and vapours. 4) Maintenance-free. 5) Environmentally friendly. 6) High level of gas tightness. 7) Delivery (l/min)1): 6 . 8) Ultimate vacuum (mbar abs.): 100. 9) Operating pressure (bar g): 2.42. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Sensors storage cabinet with control T and RH EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1) Outer Size: W1200*D700*H1885. 2) RH Range: 1%-40% or 20%-60%. 3) Shelves: 3 pcs. 4) Display: LCD. 5) Power: 48 W. 6) Volume: 1452L. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Thermoelectric Cold Plate EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional No moving parts. Direct contact cooling as much as 61 C below liquid temperature. No compressor, fluorocarbons or filters. Virtually maintenance-free operation. Mounts in any orientation. NA 2 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Channel LV Power Supply EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1) 4 channels with max. 384 W total output power. 2) Maximum output current per channel: 10A. 3) Maximum output power per channel: 160W. 4) Maximum output voltage of 32 V per channel; higher voltages possible in serial operation. 5) Electronic fuse (OCP), adjustable maximum voltage (OVP), overtemperature protection (OTP). NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A LCR Meter EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1) 20 Hz to 2 MHz, with 4-digit resolution 2) 0.05% basic accuracy with superior measurement repeatability at low and high impedance 3) High-speed measurements: 5.6 ms 4) 201 points list sweeps Versatile PC connectivity (LAN, USB and GPIB) NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A FC 7 board for DAQ and Control Application EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional The FC7 is a flexible, TCA compatible Advanced Mezzanine Card (AMC) for generic data acquisition/control applications. Built around the Xilinx Kintex 7 FPGA, the FC7 provides developers with a platform which has access to a large array of configurable I/O, primarily delivered from onboard FPGA Mezzanine Card (FMC) headers. Targeting users of high-speed optical links in high energy physics experiments, the board is capable of driving and receiving links up to 10Gb/s NA 2 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A AMC 13 (Advanced Mezzanine card AMC) EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional Advanced Mezzanine card AMC 13 NA 2 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Micro TCA Crate EHEP Tracker Laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional Shielded galvanized steel subrack with 19 rack mounting brackets MicroTCA.4 Backplane with radial IPMI-L from both MCH slots to all AMC slots and bused IPMB-0 among MCHs, PMs and CUs. The Shelf provides: 12 AMC double full-size slots, 2 redundant Micro-TCA Carrier Hub (MCH) slots (single full-size) , 4+2 Power Module (PM) slots (single full-size) , 1 JSM slot , 6 RTM double full-size slots. Active cooling through two hot-swappable Cooling Units (CUs) in push-pull configuration, providing each: 6 speed controlled 12 VDC fans., Cooling Unit Enhanced Module Management Controller (CU EMMC) , Display Module Front accessible air filter NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A HV Power Supply SY1527 Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1) CAEN SY1527 (High Voltage). 2) CPX200 DUAL 35V 10 A PSU (Low voltage). NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Keithley 6517B Electrometer and GUI Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional We have locally developed a GUI in Lab-view to interface with 6517B to control, monitor and archive the important parameters like Voltage and Current. Key features Measures resistances up to 1018 O. 10 aA (1010-18 A) current measurement resolution. Complete hardware-software solution for ASTM. D257 high resistivity measurements with the 6517B, 8009 Resistivity Test Fixture, and the KickStart High. Resistivity Measurement Application. <3 fA input bias current. 6-digit high accuracy measurement mode. <20 V burden voltage on the lowest current ranges. Voltage measurements up to 200 V with >200 O input. impedance. Built-in 1000 V voltage source. Unique alternating polarity voltage sourcing and measurement method for high resistance measurements. Built-in test sequences for four different device. characterization tests, surface and volume resistivity,. surface insulation resistance, and voltage sweeping. Optional plug-in scanner cards for testing up to ten. devices or material samples with one test setup. GPIB and RS-232 interfaces. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Agilent MSO6014A Oscilloscope Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional The MSO6014A is a 100 MHz, 4+16 channel Mixed Signal Oscilloscope from Keysight Agilent. Measure voltage or current signals over time in an electronic circuit or component to display amplitude, frequency, rise time, etc. Applications include troubleshooting, production test, and design. Additional Features: Bandwidth: 100 MHz Channels: 4 analog and 16 time-correlated digital channels Sample rate: 2 GSa/s Record Length: 2 Mpts Vertical resolution 8 bits Powerful applications suites available: I2C, SPI and USB triggering and decode, CAN, LIN and FlexRay triggering and decode, Rapid Xilinx and Altera FPGA debug MegaZoom III memory and display technology Up to 8 Mpts acquisition memory 100,000 waveforms/sec real-time update rate High-definition XGA (1024 x 768) display with 256 levels of intensity grading NA 2 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Tektronix - TDS3000B Oscilloscope Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional The TDS 3000 oscilloscopes are the lowest priced, most portable Digital Phosphor Oscilloscopes (DPOs). Now every design engineer and technician can take advantage of the tremendous benefits of DPOs. DPOs deliver a new level of insight that makes dealing with complex signals simple. DPOs display, store, and analyze, in real-time three dimensions of signal information: amplitude, time, and distribution of amplitude over time. Additional Features: Bandwidth: 300 MHz. Analog Channels: 2. Max Sample Rate: 2.5 GS/s. Max Memory Depth: 0.01 Mpts. Operating System: Windows. Form Factor: Benchtop. NA 2 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Dual Power Supplies Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional A versatile dual output power supply in a robust steel case capable of up to 35V and up to 10A. 2 x Independent outputs up to 175W. Outputs can be connected in series or parallel for outputs up to 70V or 20A Simultaneous LED display of voltage and current Power range: Up to 175W. Ripple and noise: <2mV rms (typ) <20mV p-p (full load) . Transient load response: <2ms to within 100mV of set voltage for 90% load change (CPX200) . Line Regulation:0.01% for 10%-line voltage change. Load Regulation:<0.01% for 90% load change. Meter resolution :10mV, 10mA . Meter accuracies: Volts. 0.2% 1-digit Current. 0.5% 1 digit . Input voltage :220 to 240 Volts 10% 50/60Hz. NA 8 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A GR2050, 2GHz RF Signal Generator, RS232 & GPIB Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 150kHz to 2000MHz frequency range. 10Hz setability, +/-1ppm frequency stability. Locking to external frequency standard. -127dBm to +7dBm amplitude, 0.1dB steps. AM, FM and Phase modulation, internal or external. 80 character back-lit LCD display. Keyboard and rotary encoder control. Full remote control through RS232 and GPIB. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A TTI TA320S 32 Channel Logic Analyzers Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional The TA320S is a self-contained logic analyser incorporating a high-quality LCD screen. It has a specification that meets the needs of all but the most demanding of applications. 32 data channels, 100MHz maximum acquisition speed, 5ns glitch capture and multi-level trigger sequencing. 32 data channels at 25MHz . Built-in LCD screen . 100MHz asynchronous operation . 2K word acquisition memory . 5ns glitch capture . Multi-level trigger sequencing . Disassembler options for popular uPs . NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A UZ2400 Universal Counter Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 10Hz - 2.4GHz. 2 measuring channels. 50mVrms sensitivity. RS232 interface. Software options. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Okai Reworks system , De-soldering station for ASIC/SMD Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional Okai Reworks system (1.8.1. HCT-1000, 1.8.2. PCT-1000), De-soldering station for ASIC/SMD Can de-sold different IC Package like DIP: Dual In-line Packages. BGA: Ball Grid Array; BGA graphic. BQFP: Bumpered Quad Flat Pack. CABGA/SSBGA: Chip Array/Small Scale Ball Grid Array. CBGA: Ceramic Ball Grid Array. CFP: Ceramic Flat Pack. CLGA: Ceramic Land Grid Array CPGA: Ceramic Pin Grid Array, CPGA Graphic . NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A X-ray source for the irradiation Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) 50kV/80uA. Silver(Ag) or Gold (Au) Target. USB Controlled. Stable Output. Fast. Low power. Small. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Low pressure gas system (5-110mbar) Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1. Pressure regulators. 2. Low pressure valves. 3. Pressure sensor CTE9000. 4. Arduino based DAQ system. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Gas mixing system with defined ratio Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1. Mass Flow controllers 2. Gas mixing unit 3. Bubblers 4. Gas filters (Humidity and 15um particles) NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A NIM based readout system Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1. Pre-Amplifiers (Ortec 142PC) 2. Amplifier (Ortec 579) 3. Fan in/Fan out (N401) 4. Discriminator (Ortec 935) 5. Dual timer (CAEN N93B) 6. Scalar (CAEN N1145) NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Scalable Readout System (SRS) Gaseous detector laboratory (Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) ) Functional 1. 128 channels Analogue Pipeline Voltages (APVs) 2. Front End Cards (FECs) 3. Analogue to Digital Convertors (ADCs) 4. HDMI cables 5. DAQ system 6. Mini crate NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Worldwide LHC Computing Grid Tier-2 Site Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) Functional NCP-LCG2 is one of the two operational Worldwide LHC computing grid node in Pakistan. Currently, the WLCG node at NCP has total 524 core CPUs/Job slots equivalent to 1591KSI2K and 441 TB (Raw Storage) of Disk storage which after RAID gives usable storage of 360 TB. NCP has been provided 1Gbps of R&D connectivity by PERN-2 (HEC) to facilitate the data transfer between CERN and NCP NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A High Performance (HPC) Cluster Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) Functional Local MPI based HPC cluster, based on Rocks Cluster Distribution is available for Students, researcher and Scientists belonging to different universities of Pakistan to perform their computational task. Currently 96 CPU cores are reserved for HPC facility. However, CPU and storage resources can be flexibly increased and decreased subject to resource availability and demand. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A High Throughput (HTC) Computing Batch Farm Experimental High Energy Physics Department (EHEP) Functional HT-condor based local batch processing system has been installed for Experimental High Energy Physicist, to perform their analysis tasks locally. Currently 200 cores and 100 TB storage is reserved for HT-condor batch system, which can be scale in/out according to demand. NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) is powerful technique used to probe the surface composition, chemical bonding information and electronic states of the elements within a material. A photoelectron spectrum is recorded bycounting ejected electrons over a range of electron kinetic energies when a solid surface is irradiated with a beam of soft X-rays. Functional The XPS system at NCP is a UHV system consisting of three independent chambers. The XPS chamber is equipped with a monochromatic Al and a continuous Al/Mg X-ray sources where angle resolved measurements and depth profiling can also be performed in addition to the usual XPS measurements. The preparation chamber has two e-beam evaporators and a quartz crystal microbalance to measure the thickness of the evaporated thin films. The chamber is also equipped with gaseous assembly to purposely introduce various gases in this chamber. The Surface Probe Microscopy (SPM) chamber is used to image the top surface of solids atthe atomic level using Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy (STM) or Atomic Forc Microscopy (AFM). NA 1 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad, Director EHEPD ashfaq.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center(PASTIC) N/A Scanning Tunnelling Microscope (STM) Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) Functional STM is a profiler used for studying surface properties of materials from micron all the way down to atomic level. This machine can provide 2D and 3D images from surface topography including roughness, grain size, height of steps, and unevenness. It also has spectroscopy (I-V, I-Z) and nanolithography options. Its lateral and vertical resolution is better than 0.1nm and works for conductor and semi-conductor metal samples NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Saleem Mirza muhammad.saleem@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A I-V Characterization and Solar Cells Testing Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) This setup is used for measuring I-V characteristics of solar cells. The solar simulator irradiates the samples with the light of one sun intensity i.e. irradiation intensity of 1000 W/m2 and air mass of 1.5G. Keithley source meter 2440 measures IV data which can be used to calculate conversion efficiency, fill factor anddiode properties. The setup can measure I-V characteristics of solid and thin films in the range of of 10 u? to 1G? using 4-probe and 2-probe methods. Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Sultan muhammad.sultan@ncp.edu.pk Pakistan Museum of Natural History(PMNH) N/A Electrochemical workstation Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) The Gamry Reference 3000 is a high performance potentiostat / galvanostat for testing of battery, supercapacitors or fuel cells and can be used for electrochemical measurements requiring high voltages and high currents. The instrument can be used for Physical Electrochemistry, linear and cyclic Voltammetry, DC Corrosion, Cyclic charge/discharge and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy from 1Hz to 1 MHz. The current of the instrument ranges from 300pA to 3A and voltages up to 5V. The minimum resolution of the instrument is 92aA. Functional NA 1 Dr. Yaqoob Khan yaqoob.khan@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A X-Ray diffraction XRD Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) X-Ray diffraction is used to identify the crystal structure and chemical composition of solids. The instrument has a Copper source that can be energized to 3kW and the diffracted beam is collected by a Si strip detector. Measurements can be made from angles starting at 0.1 degree in both Theta-Theta and Theta-2Theta configurations. The instrument also has an in-built search-match library and analysis software. Functional NA 1 Dr. Yaqoob Khan yaqoob.khan@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Simultaneous Thermal Analysis (STA) Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) TGA is a thermal analysis technique involving the determination of change in weight of sample as a function of temperature and/or time of heating. TGA can measure oxidative stability, decomposition kinetics, copolymer or polymer blend characterization, polymers for the presence of fillers, and additives, Polymer degradation, including under oxidative environments and ash content. DSC is a thermal analysis technique used to measure changes in heat flows associated with material transitions. DSC measurements provide both qualitative and quantitative data on endothermic (heat absorbing) and exothermic (heat evolving) processes. DSC determine characteristic properties of a sample like: glass transition, crystallization, melting, oxidization, decomposition, phase transformation and heat capacity. Functional Simultaneous Thermal Analyzer (STA) is a state of the art equipment which can perform Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) and Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) analysis simultaneously. Analysis can be performed in temperature range (RT-1000)Cunder inert (Ar,N2) or oxidative (air) atmosphere. NA 1 Dr. Saifullah Awan saifullah@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Differential Scanning Calorimeter (DSC) Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) DSC is a thermo-analytical technique in which the difference in the amount of heat required to increase the temperature of a sample and reference is measured as a function of temperature and time. DSC determine characteristic properties of a sample such as its glass transition, crystallization, melting, oxidization, decomposition, phase transformation and heat capacity. Functional DSC is state of the art equipment for thermal analysis. Temperature range is 100oC to 500oC with controlled Cooling/heating under liquid nitrogen in inert (Ar, N2) atmosphere. DSC measurements provide both qualitative and quantitative data on endothermic (heat absorbing) and exothermic (heat evolving) processes. NA 1 Dr. Saifullah Awan saifullah@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy is a versatile technique used to obtain an infrared absorption or emission spectrum of solid or powder samples. FT-IR spectrometer simultaneously collects high-spectral-resolution data over a wide spectral range (400-4000) cm-1 with a resolution of 4 cm-1. IR absorbance peaks provide characteristic fingerprints of functional groups like: C-H, O-H, C=O, etc. FTIR has diverse applications in various areas for e.g. environment, food, pharmaceuticals, plastics etc. Functional NA 1 Mr. Muhammad Umar Farooq umar.farooq@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A UV-VIS Spectrophotometer Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) A spectrophotometer measures a materials reflection or transmission by measuring light intensity/absorbency at a specific wavelength. Spectrophotometry is a top quantitative analysis method in fields such as chemistry, materials science, semiconductors, and forensic examination, as well as in clinical applications. Scan range for Diffuse Reflectance Spectroscopy (DRS) lambda 950 model is 200-2400 nm and up to 3300 nm for liquid samples. Scan range for UV/VIS Lambda 25 model is 200-1100 nm. In order to determine the band gap variation in pure and doped semiconductor samples, interpretation of optical data is done through Tauc plot. Reflectance/ Transmittance/ Absorbance spectrophotometry analysis is carried out on thin film samples. Absorbance scan for liquid samples for a vast range of application such as DNA, RNA, and protein analysis, dosage, kinetic, dissolution, food analysis, impurity determinations etc. Functional NA 1 Mr. Hammad Ahmad hammad.ahmad@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Gas Chromatography-Mass spectrometry (GC-MS) Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) Gas Chromatography-Mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is an analytical method that combines the features of GC and MS to identify different substances within a test sample. It is capable of separating, detecting and partially characterizing the organic compound particularly when present in small quantity. MS provides some definite structural information from sample in small quantity. The separation and identification of the components of complex natural and synthetic mixtures are achieved more quickly than any other techniques with less sample. Functional GCMS-QP2010 is an advanced standard gas chromatograph mass spectrometer having a simple operation and enhanced performance. NA 1 Dr. Nisar Ahmad nisar.ahmadkhan@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Plasma Treatment System Nanosciences and Technology Department (NS&TD) Plasma system is used for surface treatments, cleaning and functionalization. Functional System is a semiautomatic controlled in basic unit. The dimensions are approx. w 345 mm x d 420 mm x h 211 mm. Two stainless steel needle valves areinstalled for independent Gas supplies. Vacuum chamber is of type D (round with a quartz glass support and a cover). System uses Standard electrodes. The range of generator is 0 100 W with 40 kHz frequency. NA 1 Dr. Sara Qaisar Director NS&TD sara.qaisar@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) Atomic and Laser Physics Department (ALPD) A typical output of the experiment is the Optical Emission Spectrum of the Laser Produced Plasma Plume of any sample, which contains the spectral lines of all the constituent elements present in the sample. Thus, the identification of the characteristic spectral lines of elements yields the qualitative analysis of any sample within a fraction of a second. As an example, an optical emission spectrum of a solid sample and all the observed lines are identified belonging to different elements. The Limit of Detection of elements is in the ppm range, which can be improved by some other techniques such as Double Pulse LIBS, Field Effects and Cavity Confinements. No sample preparation is required. Functional The LIBS technique is based on the study of Optical Emission Spectroscopy (OES) of the laser produced plasma plume, which reveals the characteristic atomic lines of the constituent elements. Thus, qualitative elemental analysis of any sample that may be in the gas, liquid or solid phase can be performed in a fraction of a second. The basic tool for this setup is a high energy pulsed laser, highly sensitive detection system normally a high-resolution spectrometer equipped with charged coupled devices and a delay generator to adjust a delay time between the laser pulse and the opening of the detection system. The beam of a high energy laser is focused on the surface of the sample, which ablates a very small amount of the sample and generates plasma. The laser produced plasma (LPP) plume emission is registered on the spectrometer, which consists of spectral lines of the elements present in the sample. The time resolved emission spectrum of the laser-produced plasma contains entirely different spectrum. During the initial time of the laser-produced plasma, up to a few nanoseconds, the emission is dominated by bremsstrahlung, a continuum spectrum. As the plasma cools down, up to a few 200 nano-seconds, the emission spectrum contains spectral lines of singly ionized atoms and that of neutral atoms. However, after a few microseconds, the emission spectrum contains mainly the spectral lines of neutral atoms whereas, with further plasma cooling, the emission is dominated by the atomic and molecular spectra. To conduct these experiments, the Atomic and Laser Physics Laboratory is equipped with a Nd:YAG Laser (Quantel, France) which can deliver 850 mJ at 1064 nm with 5 ns pulse duration and works at 10 Hz repetition rate. This laser is equipped with a Second Harmonic at 532 nm delivering 500 mJ. The detection unit consists of a set of four miniature spectrometers (Avantes, Hollands), each with 10 microns slit width and equipped with CCD detectors covering the spectral range from 250 to 780 nm. For the adjustment of delay time, a Delay generator (SRS 353, USA) is coupled with the laser triggering system and the spectrometers. A HR 4000 Spectrometer (Ocean Optics) is also available to capture the optical emission spectrum from 200 to 1100 nm NA 1 Dr. M. Aslam Baig (H.I, S.I, T.I.) aslam.baig@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A The Laser Ablation Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (LA-TOF-MS) Atomic and Laser Physics Department (ALPD) This Analytical Technology is based on production and detection of ions of the constituent elements of the sample. The ions are produced by laser ablation, which are then accelerated through a field free region and detected in accordance with the time of arrival at the detector. The solid samples are analysed with absolute quantitative elemental compositions. In addition, this setup is used for the isotopic abundance measurements. The advances of simultaneous LIBS and LA-TOF-MS are allowing the analysts to measure more elements over a greater dynamic range of concentration up to sub ppm with a single pulse of laser sampling. Functional The LA -TOF-MS technology is ideal for getting temporal information of elements of any solid sample. The set up consists of a Nd:YAG Laser (Quantel, France), delivering 500 mJ at 532 nm with 5 ns pulse width and 10 Hz repetition rate. This laser is coupled with a locally designed and fabricated Time of Flight (TOF) Mass Spectrometer consisting of three regions; ionization region, acceleration region and detection section. The ions are produced by Laser Ablation, which are accelerated through a one-meter field free region and detected with a Channeltron/ micro channel plates. The data are stored using a 500 MHz storage oscilloscope (Tektronix, USA). Major funding to develop this setup came from the Pakistan Academy of Sciences. NA 1 Dr. M. Aslam Baig (H.I, S.I, T.I.) aslam.baig@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) Atomic and Laser Physics Department (ALPD) Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is a physical vapour deposition (PVD) process. It is used to produce high quality thin films/Coatings under vacuum or background gases. Functional In PLD technique, a pulsed laser is directed on to a target material to ablate a small amount of material creating a plasma plume. The ablated species condense on the substrate.The SiC heater is installed in the PLD chamber along the target holder axis by means of vacuum sealed feed through. It is thermally and electrically isolated from the chamber main body to avoid exchange of heat energy with the chamber main body. A K-type thermocouple is installed inside the SiC heater to measure the temperature touching the substrate holder surface. The heater can work in O2 or in any background gas and the substrate can be heated up to 1000 oC. The target and the substrate holders can be rotated by an external DC motor with a maximum speed up to 10 rpm for uniform thin film deposition. The PLD system is equipped with the Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM) for in-situ thin film growth monitoring. The system is also equipped with a Reflection High Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED) which is a powerful surface sensitive technique for structure analysis of crystalline materials. It provides information about the epi-layer thickness, growth rate, surface roughness, crystal structure of the surface. A (Q-smart, Quantel) Nd:YAG laser having 266 nm wavelength and 10 Hz repetition rate which is capable of delivering maximum energy of 100 mJ is being used for the target ablation. NA 1 Dr. M. Aslam Baig (H.I, S.I, T.I.) aslam.baig@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Thermal Evaporation System Atomic and Laser Physics Department (ALPD) Thermal evaporation system is one of the simplest forms of physical vapor deposition (PVD) and typically uses a resistive heat source to evaporate a solid material in a vacuum environment to deposit a thin film. The material is heated in a high vacuum chamber until sufficient vapor pressure is produced. The evaporated material traverses the vacuum chamber with thermal energy and coats the substrate. The thermal evaporator will be used only for METALS. It has the capabilities for depositing wide area amorphous metallic thin films. During the deposition, the rate of deposition and film thickness can be monitored. The thermal evaporator is attached with a Glovebox and it has direct access from the glovebox for loading/unloading the samples. The metallic thin film can be patterned on any substrate in any shape/structure using a shadow mask. It has applications in the fabrication of devices e.g., solar cell, diode, transistors etc. Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Aslam Baig (H.I, S.I, T.I.) aslam.baig@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Echelle Spectrometer Atomic and Laser Physics Department (ALPD) (i) Time Resolved Optical Emission Studies (ii) Atomic Parameters Measurements 1) Transition Probabilities 2) Branching Fractions 3) Oscillator Strengths Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Aslam Baig (H.I, S.I, T.I.) aslam.baig@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Fiber Laser: Locally design and fabricate Fiber Laser for Laser Produced Plasma Diagnostics Atomic and Laser Physics Department (ALPD) A NL-100 nitrogen laser has also been acquired for the Laser Induced Florescence studies of atoms and molecules. A number of PhD and M.Phil students from different universities in Pakistan are utilizing these facilities. This laboratory is being established with substantial financial assistance from Pakistan Academy of Science. Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Aslam Baig (H.I, S.I, T.I.) aslam.baig@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Tandem Accelerator Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Accelerator facility can analyse samples upto micron depth utilizing following ion beam analysis techniques: 1) Rutherford Backscattering (RBS) 2) Particle-Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) 3) Elastic Recoil Detection Analysis (ERDA) 4) Particle-Induced Gamma-ray Emission (PIGE) 5) Nuclear Reaction Analysis (NRA) 6) Ion Beam Induced Luminescence (IBIL) 7) Channeling (for Crystal Structure) 8) Total IBA (using multiple techniques simultaneously) Functional Model: 5UDH-2 Make: NEC, USA Technical Voltage: 5 MV (Maximum) Charging: Pelletron charging system Ion Sources: Two (SNICS and RF) Ion Beams: H, He, B, C, Si, P, Fe, Ni, Cu & Au Beam Lines: Two (15 degree and 30 degree) Beam energy: 700 keV to 30 MeV Beam current: ~ 200 nA Beam Collimation: 0.5 mm to 8 mm Number of Targets: 6 samples at a time can be placed in the target chamber NA 1 Mr. Turab ali ali.awais@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A 5 MV PelletronAccelerator Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For Ion beam analysis and irradiation-matter interaction. Functional NA 1 Mr. Turab ali ali.awais@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Rutherford Back Scattering (RBS) Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For non-destructive multielement compositional analysis, thickness measurement and depth profiling of thin coatings Functional NA 1 Mr. Turab Ali aliturabb@yahoo.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A RBS-channeling Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For: Crystallographic analysis of thin films such as crystal damage and disorder distribution. Determination of implantation and polishing damage. Lattice location of dopants and point defects. measures lattice strain distribution. Determination of percent amorphization and thickness of amorphized layers Functional NA 1 Mr. Turab Ali aliturabb@yahoo.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Particle Induced X-rays Emission (PIXE) Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For elemental analysis in environmental, biological and archaeological samples. Functional NA 1 Mr. Javed Hussain javaid0007@yahoo.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Air-PIXE Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For large object and wet sample analysis in air Functional NA 1 Mr. Javed Hussain javaid0007@yahoo.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Elastic Recoil Detection Analysis (ERDA) Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For hydrogen detection and quantification in components or materials Functional NA 1 Mr. Turab Ali turab.ali@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Particle Induced Gamma rays Emission (PIGE) Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Light element analysis: For Nitrogen, Carbon, Florine and Oxygen identifications in Steel and other materials Functional NA 1 Mr. Javed Hussain javed.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Nuclear Reaction Analysis (NRA) Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Non-destructive compositional analysis of light elements especially B, C, N, and O. Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Usman musman@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Charged Particle Activation Analysis Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Basic research on radioisotopes productions using ion beam induced nuclear activation technique. Ion beam induced degradation study of fission and fusion nuclear reactors grade materials to assess the life of nuclear reactors materials Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Usman musman@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Ion Beam Induced Luminescence (IBIL) Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For Analysis/identifications of compounds and the chemical states of the materials, defects analysis in materials Functional NA 1 Mr. Javed Hussain javed.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Ion Beam Irradiation Experimental Physics Department (EPD) 1. Ion beam modification of materials/nanomaterials. 2. Radiation hardness testing of electronic components of Satellites. 3. Stopping power, ion range and secondary emission testing of Satellites body materials. 4. Degradation study of Satellites body materials to access life of Satellite. 5. Ion beam induced degradation study of fission and fusion nuclear reactors grade materials to assess the life of nuclear reactors materials. Functional NA 1 Mr. Turab Ali turab.ali@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Proton Elastic Scattering Analysis (PESA) Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Elastically scattered protons from the target are detected at different angles. The scattered yield is then used to calculate the scattering cross section of the target. Functional NA 1 Mr. Kashif kashif_phy@yahoo.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Gamma Spectroscopy (NaI) Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Determination of natural occurring radionuclides in soil and water Functional NA 1 Mr. Javed Hussain javed.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A High Purity Germanium (HPGe) Gamma Spectroscopy Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Determination of natural occurring radionuclides in soil and water Functional NA 1 Mr. Javed Hussain javed.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Air-sampler Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Collection of air samples for examination of indoor/outdoor air quality and microbiological contamination in indoors Functional NA 1 Mr. Javed Hussain javed.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Atomic Physics Research Experimental Physics Department (EPD) K-shell, L-shell X-rays production cross section measurements in various materials using light and heavy ions Functional NA 1 Mr. Javed Hussain javed.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Muffle Furnace, 1700? Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For basic materials research Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Usman musman@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Vacuum Tube Furnace, 1100? Experimental Physics Department (EPD) For basic materials research Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Usman musman@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Furnaces, 1100? and 1700 ? Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Vacuum Tube Furnaces available in EPD are a part of associated labs of NCP where materials preparation for ion beam studies is performed through various methods. The vacuum tube annealing furnace is capable of heating the samples upto 1100 C in various ambients like vacuum, Ar, and N2 at the materials preparation stage or post process annealing. One of the key role of the furnace is to recover ion irradiation / implantation induced defects recovery and activation of dopants in semiconductors. In general, the furnace is equally useful for the purification, coating, drying, hardening or ageing of samples. Muffle furnace of can heat samples up to 1700 o C in air. The furnace is part of the same lab and is available for all kinds of high temperature heating requirements. The facility is open to researcher from NCP irrespective of their department and affiliation. Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Usman musman@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Edwards Vacuum Coating Unit Experimental Physics Department (EPD) Edwards E306A Vacuum coating bell jar coater unit is a thermal evaporation system where thin films through resistive heating methods can be produced in high vacuum environment. Thermal evaporator evaporates a metal film over a semiconductor or metal substrate. The metal source to be evaporated is placed in a filament or crucible, in which a large current is passed. The metal melts, and evaporates on the target substrate above the source, producing a uniform film. The system is equipped with a rotary and a diffusion pump to provide vacuum levels of up to ~ 10power(-6) Pa during the deposition process. It is being used for films preparations for ion beam accelerator system in addition to other scientific applications. Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Usman musman@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Centre Lathe Machine Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Model: Jet (JH-1880ZX) 2) Dimension: L x W x H (3458 x 1016 x 1220) mm. 3) Centre distance: 2032 mm. 4) Spindle Speed: 25-1800 rpm. 5) Operations: Straight turning, Facing, Boring, Drilling, Threading, Reaming, Taper Turning. NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Universal Milling Machine Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Model: U-1000B. 2) Dimension: 2050 x 2535 x 1840 mm. 3) Table size: 360 x 1500 mm. 4) Spindle Speed: 40-1750 rpm . 5) Operations: Facing, Side milling, Gear cutting, NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Drilling Machine Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Model: GHD-27 2) Drilling capacity: 32mm 3) Tapping capacity: M20 4) Table size: 405 x 505mm 5) Operations: Drilling, reaming, spot facing, countersinking, producing flat and contour surfaces, grooves, gear teeth and helical forms. NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Drilling cum Milling Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Model: GHD-27 2) Spindle Speed: 25-2560 rpm 3) Table size: 280 x 600mm NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Metal Handsaw Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Model: HBS 1018W 2) Cutting Capacity at 90 degree: Dia 250mm. 3) Cutting Capacity at 45 degree: Dia 215mm 4) Cutting Speed: 25, 40, 50 70 m/min. 5) Vice Adjustment: 0 degree - 45 degree NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Combination shear, break and roll Machine Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Model: SBR-40N. 2) Machine type: Manual. 3) Max sheet capacity: (M.S, Copper 0.9mm), (Mild-Aluminium 1.5mm), (Steel 0.6mm). 4) Max shear, bend & roll length: 1015mm. 5) Size of Slip roll: Dia 41mm. 6) Width of sheet: 1m. NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Welding Machine Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Model: Linc-405s 2) Machine: Electric arc. 3) Current capacity: 15-400A NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Shearing Machine Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Machine type: Motorized 2) Width of sheet: 1m. 3)Thickness of sheet: 3mm NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Universal Bending Machine Mechanical Engineering Workshop Functional 1) Machine type: Motorized 2) Width of sheet: 1m. 3) Thickness of sheet: 3mm NA 1 Mr. Ishtiaq Hussain ishtiaq.hussain@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Radon Concentration in Soil, Air & Water RTM-2200 SARAD de Centre for Earthquake Studies (CES) Measurement of Radon in Soil, Air & Water Functional NA 1 Mr. Waqar Ali Zafar waqar.zafar@ncp.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Electron Beam Evaporation System National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) For deposition of nano structured thin film coating of oxides, elements compounds etc. Functional 4 crucibles for target material, High Vacuum, Thickness monitor, Automatic control NA 1 Dr. M. Khalid Alamgir dr.alamgir@gmail.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Thermal Coating Unit National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) For deposition of thin film/coating of elements, metals etc. Functional Two boats for target material, High Vacuum, Manual Control NA 1 Mr. M. Zaka Ansar zakaphy@gmail.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) For Phase transformation, production of CNTs, Annealing, sintering and calcination of samples under vacuum & different environments Functional Temp 1400C, Low Vacuum, Different gases NA 1 Dr. M. Khalid Alamgir dr.alamgir@gmail.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Vacuum Oven National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) For drying, annealing, sintering and calcination of samples Functional Temp 200 C, Low Vacuum, For Different environment NA 1 Mr. M. Zaka Ansar zakaphy@gmail.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A LCR meter National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) For measurement of Inductance, capacitance and resistive of samples Functional Frequency 100 Hz to 10 KHz, Accuracy 0.25% NA 1 Dr. M. Khalid Alamgir dr.alamgir@gmail.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Spin Coater National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) For solution based thin film coating Functional RPM 5000 NA 1 Mr. M. Zaka Ansar zakaphy@gmail.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Spray Coating National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) For coating of PTFE only Functional NA 1 Mr. M. Zaka Ansar zakaphy@gmail.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Raman Spectroscopy National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) Raman Spectrum of powder/liquid sample Functional Wavelength 785 nm, software for spectrum, scanning up to 2400 cm Raman Shift NA 1 Mr. M. Zaka Ansar zakaphy@gmail.com National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Calibration of vacuum gauges National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) Functional Primary / secondary vacuum standards NA 1 Dr. M. Maqsood maqsood@ninvast.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Helium leak detector National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) Leak detection & rectification Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Maqsood maqsood@ninvast.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Vacuum pump measuring system National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) Pumping speed measurement of rotary/roots/diffusion vacuum pumps Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahmad Yar businesscentre@ninvast.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Permeability measurement system National Institute of Vacuum Sciences and Technology (NINVAST) Permeability measurement of Helium gas Functional NA 1 Dr. M. Maqsood maqsood@ninvast.edu.pk National Centre of Physics (NCP), Islamabad N/A Vacuum system designing & development Depending upon user requirements & complexity of the vacuum system Vacuum system up gradation, Problem identification & rectification of industrial vacuum system, Repair / maintenance of all types of vacuum pumps . Functional NA 1 Dr. Talib Hussain thminhas7@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) National Centre of Excellence in Geology, SEM Laboratory SEM has wide applications in a number of disciplines such as physical sciences as well as engineering and it is particularly designed for earth sciences. Combination of Backscattered, EDS and CL detectors makes it a magnificent machine to be used for determining both morphological as well as compositional variations in any geological matter of interest. Functional JSM-IT-100 NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Hanif mhanif_nceg@uop.edu.pk +92-91-9221254 University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A X-Ray Fluorescence spectrometer (XRF) National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), XRF Laboratory Element Analysis Functional X-Ray Fluorescence Sepectrometry (WDXRF) (Wavelength - despensive x-ray flourescence spectrometry is one of the most widely used and versatile of all instrumental analytical techniques. An XRF spectrometer uses primary radiation from an X-ray tube to excite secondary emission from a sample. NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah nimat_khattak@yahoo.com +92-91-9221254 University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A X-Ray Diffractometre (XRD) National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), XRD Laboratory Mineral Identification Functional X-rays, being electromagnetic waves, are susceptible to diffraction. Having wavelengths similar to the inter atomic distances in crystals, they interact with a crystal lattice in the same way that light interacts with a conventional diffraction grating. In other words, they are dispersed in different directions according to wavelength. An important difference is that X-rays penetrate below the surface of the crystal and rays reflected from successive atomic layers may or may not be in phase. The condition for a maximum of reflected intensity is that the contribution from successive planes should be in phase. If the interplanar spacing is d, the condition is expressed by the well known Braggs law: nl=dsinq where l is the wavelength of the incoming X-rays, q is the diffraction angle which is equal to the angle of incidence of the incoming X-rays and n is an integer. NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Inductive Couple Mass Spectrometer (ICPMS) National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Element Analysis Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrometer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Element Analysis Functional Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (A Analyst 700) equipped with graphite furnace and Mercury Hydride System NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Fire Assy National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Gold and Precious Metal Analysis Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A CHNS Analyzer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Carbon, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Sulphur Analysis Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Portable XRF National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Complete Elemental Analyses Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Muffle Furnace National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Fixed Carbon/loss on Ignition Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Specific Gravity Balance National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Specific Gravity Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Oven National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Moisture Loss Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A DR 2800 Spectrophotometer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Environmental GeoChemistry Chemical Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Turbidity/Portable Analyzer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Environmental GeoChemistry PH/EC/TDS/Resistivity/Salinity Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A BOD Incubator National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Environmental GeoChemistry BOD Analyses in water Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Magnetic Separator/Shaking Table National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geo Chemistry Lab Heavy Mineral Analyses Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Acid Digestion/Crushing/Grinding/Powdering National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG) Soil/Plant/Rock Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Thin Section Preparation Equipment National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG) 1) Standard Thin Section with blue dye. 2)Thin Section for Friable/Unconsolidated Material. 3) Staining of Rocks Cutting. 3)Ditch well sample staining. 4) SEM Thin Section. 5) SEM Slab. Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Polarizing Microscope National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG) Metal feasibility for construction Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Raman Spectroscope National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Gemology/ Museum Raman Spectroscopy for Mineral/Gemstone Identification Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Gemstones Testing National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Gemology/ Museum For the Identification of Gemstones Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Petroleum Geochemistry Quantitative Analysis of Functional Groups in the sample through wavelength. Functional Interferometer: Michelson Interferometer (30o incident angle). Beam splitter:Germanium-coated KBr plate for Middle IR. Light source:Air cooled ceramic for Middle/Far IR Detector:DLATGS detector with temperature control for Middle/Far IR Wave number range:7800-350 cm-1. Resolution:0.5,1,2,4,8, 16, cm-1 (Middle/Far IR). S/N ration:40,000:1 and higher. NA 1 Dr. Samina Siddique +92-91-9221254 saminasddq@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Gas Chromatography FID(Flame Ionization Detector) National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Petroleum Geochemistry Quantitative Analysis of Organic Compound Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A CHNS elemental analysers (T.O.C) Total organic Carbon National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Petroleum Geochemistry Total organic Carbon, Analysis of Solids, Semi Solids, Powder (including solvent and Sample Preparation charges) Functional NA 1 Dr. Samina Siddique +92-91-9221254 saminasddq@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Thin Section/Slide preparation for palynological studies National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Paleontology/Sedimentology Preparation of Slide/Thin Section Only Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Reflected/transmitted microscopy National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Paleontology/Sedimentology Sedimentological Investigation (Including Roundness, Sphericity studies, Microfacies, Facies Association and Depositional Environment Studies etc.). Paleontological Investigation (Biostratigraphic Analysis and Formation Identification etc.) Palynological Investigation (Palynostratigraphic) Analysis and Formation Identification etc.) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A U.V Visible Spectrophotometer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Environment/Soil Sciences The design of UV-VIS is based on Beer-Lamber Law (the law was discovered by Pierre Bouguer a French scientist before 1729). The law states that the absorbance of a solution is directly proportional to the solutions concentration. When a beam of light from UV light source falls on a prism it splits into other beams of light according to the wavelength. Thereafter, each beam falls on a half mirrored device and split into two beam of equal intesity. One beam (colored magenta) passes through the sample solution present in a transparent flask (cuvette) whereas the other reference beam (blue in color) passes through cuvette which contain only solvent. The intensities of these two beams are determined by the UV detector and spectrometer scans all the wavelengths according to the intensity. Functional NA 1 Dr. Samina Siddique +92-91-9221254 saminasi@hotmail.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography - HPLC National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Environment/Soil Sciences Quantitative Analysis of Organic Compounds/Enzymes from Liquid Extract Functional NA 1 Dr. Samina Siddique +92-91-9221254 saminasi@hotmail.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geophysics Ground Penetrating Radar is a totally non-destructive technique to produce a 2 and 3 dimension view of subsurface without any drilling trenching or ground disturbances. Functional The GPR operates by transmitting electromagnetic impulses into the ground through transmitter antenna. Ground penetrating radar waves can reach depths up to 40-50 meters in low conductivity materials such as dry sand or granite. The antennas of vast range of frequencies available in this centre are: 25 MHZ to 200 MHZ unshielded antenna. 100 MHZ , 250MHz, 500MHz, 800MHz shielded antenna. NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Magnetometer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geophysics The Geometrics high sensitivity Cesium Vapor Magnetometer model G-858 MagMapper is the industry standard for mining, oil/gas exploration, unexploded ordnance detection, archaeological surveys and utility location. The simple-to-use logging console provides real-time feedback up to 2 acres per hour of tight line spacing coverage plus several options that can increase productivity even further. Functional model G-858 NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Terrameter National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geophysics The ABEM Terrameter LUND Imaging System made in Sweden, provides fast, accurate and automated resistivity imaging in 2D and 3D. Functional Terrameter SAS-4000 LUND Imaging System NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Geode Ultra-Light Exploration Seismograph National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geophysics The new Geode seismic recorder combines the best of Geometrics' traditional seismic recorders with the flexibility and convenience of a distributed system. It's ideal for refraction or reflection, downhole or VSP - even tomography surveys. Functional The Geode seismic modules house from 3 to 24 channels each, weigh only 8 lbs (3.6 kg) and interconnect using inexpensive digital network cable. The Geode will run all day on a small 12v battery and sleeps when not in use. NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Tromino National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geophysics It is the new generation of ultra-compact and ultra-lightweight instruments for high resolution digital seismic noise measurement. TROMINO allows to measure also the large and potentially dangerous vibrations in buildings and structures Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A VLF Wadi E/M Unit National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geophysics Civil Work, Fracture Analysis Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Sieve shaker National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering 1) Grain Size Analyses (Sieve Analysis). 2) Finess Modulus Test. 3) Clay Lumps and Friable Particle Test. 4) Soundness of Aggregate. Functional NA 1 Dr. Waqas Ahmed +92-91-9221254 waqas.nce@gmail.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Casa Grande Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geophysics Atter Berg Limits(LL) Functional NA 1 Dr. Waqas Ahmed +92-91-9221254 waqas.nce@gmail.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Loss Angeles Abrasion Machine National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Loss Angeles Abrasion Test Functional NA 1 Dr. Waqas Ahmed +92-91-9221254 waqas.nce@gmail.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A CBR Testing Machine National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering California Bearing Ratio Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Hydrometer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Hydrometer Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Rock Coring Machine National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Rock Core Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Uniaxial Compression Machine National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering UCS, UTS, Rock Triaxial Test (Hoek Cell), Crushing Value of Aggregate Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Unconfined CBR Testing Machine National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Unconfined Strength of Soil Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Proctor Testing Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Standard Proctor Test, Modified Proctor Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Field Density Test Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Field Density Tes Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Soil Direct Shear Box National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Direct Shear Box Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Impact Testing Machine National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Impact Value of Aggregate Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Consolidometer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Consolidation Test, Swell Index Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Rock Direct Share Box National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Rock Direct Shear Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Resonant Column Testing Machine National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Resonant Column Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Soil Cyclic Triaxial Testing Machine National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Cyclic Triaxial Test, Consolidated Undrained (CU), Consolidated Drained (CD), Unconsolidated Undrained (UU) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Point Load Testing Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Point Load Test (without Sample Preparation) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Schmidt Hammer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Schmidt Hammer test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Concrete Hammer National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Concrete Hammer test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Soil Water Characteristic Cell National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Soil Water Characteristic Cell test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Speedy Moisture Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Speedy Moisture Apparatus Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Soil Spy Rosina Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Soil Spy Rosina Apparatus Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Flakiness and Elongation Scales National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Flakiness and Elongation Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Slake Durability Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Slake Durability Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Skid Resistance Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Skid Resistance Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A SPT (Standard Penetration Test) Test Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering SPT (Standard Penetration Test) Test Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Specific Gravity & water Absorption Testing Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Water Absorption of Rock, Specific Gravity of Rock, Porosity of Rock, Specific Gravity of Soil Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Flash & Fire Point Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Flash & Fire Point of Bitumen Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Softening Point Apparatus National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Softening Point Test, Visual Classification, Bilk Unit Weight, Natural Moisture Content, Rodded Unit Weight of Aggregate Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com University of Peshawar, Peshawar N/A Geodetic GPS National Centre of Excellence in Geology(NCEG), Geotechincal Engineering Data Acquisition Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nimat Ullah +92-91-9221254 nimat_khattak@yahoo.com DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A TLC Tank and UV Cabinet School of Health Sciences 1. Sterioid Testing (800 Rs) 2. Identification of compound (800 Rs) 3. Qualitative Analysis (800 Rs) Functional NA 1 Dr. Kashif Shafique Vice Dean School of Health Sciences k.shafique@duhs.edu.pk 0331-2241380 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A DT Apparatus School of Health Sciences Determination of Disintegration time of tablets Functional NA 1 Dr. Kashif Shafique Vice Dean School of Health Sciences k.shafique@duhs.edu.pk 0331-2241380 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A Dissolution Apparatus School of Health Sciences Determination of Dissolution of tablets and capsules and its invitro bioavailability (4000 Rs) Functional NA 1 Dr. Kashif Shafique Vice Dean School of Health Sciences k.shafique@duhs.edu.pk +92-331-2241380 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography - HPLC School of Health Sciences 1. Assay of Medicines (4000 per sample) 2. Determination of content uniformity. (4000 per sample) 3. Determination of unknown compounds. (4000 per sample) 4. Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis. (4000 per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Kashif Shafique k.shafique@duhs.edu.pk +92-331-2241380 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A UV-Visible Spectrophotometer School of Health Sciences Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis (2000rs per Sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Kashif Shafique k.shafique@duhs.edu.pk +92-331-2241380 DOW University of Health Sciences, Karachi(DUHMS) N/A Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) School of Health Sciences Compound Identification (4000rs per Sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Kashif Shafique k.shafique@duhs.edu.pk +92-331-2241380 Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A HPLC- provided with uv- detector Central Research Lab % contents of all drugs absorbing in UV- range(190-600nm) (2000rs per sample) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Dissolution Apparatus Central Research Lab In- vitro bio equivalence studies of immediate and sustained release dosage forms (Immediate release Rs. 1000/- per sample Sustainable releasse Rs. 2000/- per sample ) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A TLC Central Research Lab Qualitative Purposes (500rs/Sample) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Stability Chamber Central Research Lab Accelerated Stability Studies (2000rs/Sample) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Rotary Evaporator & Soxhalt Extractor Central Research Lab Evaporation of extract under vacum (0-100 Kg) (2000rs/Sample) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Humalyzer Central Research Lab Bio chemical tests (2000rs/Test ) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com Lahore College for Women University LCWU, Lahore N/A Disintegration Tester Central Research Lab Disintegration of tables/ capsules (Uncoated/ Film coated/ sugar coated tables capsules Rs. 500/-per sample Enteric coated tables Rs. 1000/- per sample ) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr.Farah Khan Director Research and Post Graduate Studies drfarah_khann@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Plant Growth Chamber (Incubator) Central Research Laboratory Laboratory lubrication, seed germination and plant growth studies. (Rs 2000/week) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A HPLC Central Research Laboratory Analysis of proteins, vitamin C, sugars, carboxylic acids, amino acids, nucleic acid and pesticides residues in soil and food samples. (Rs 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer Central Research Laboratory Estimation of metals in soil, plant and water samples. (Rs 50/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Flame Photometer Central Research Laboratory Estimation of Sodium and potassium in soil, plant and water samples. (Rs 100 per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Chloride Analyzer Central Research Laboratory Determination of chloride Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Osmometer Central Research Laboratory Determination of Osmotic potential in cell sap. (Rs 200/- per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Freeze Dryer Central Research Laboratory Drying of samples in frozen state. (Rs 500/- per sample for 24 h) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Tissue Scope Central Research Laboratory Detailed microscopic examination of plant and animal tissues. (Rs 500/- per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Spectrophotometer Central Research Laboratory Determination of Nitrogen and Phosphorus in soil etc. (Rs 100/- per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Total Carbon Analyzer Central Research Laboratory Determination of total organic and nitrogen in soil, plant and environmental samples. (Rs 200/- per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com PMAS ARID UNIVERSITY, Rawalpindi N/A Gas Chromatograph Central Research Laboratory Determination of essential oils, drugs, organic acids, hydrocarbons, fragrances, amino acids, steroids.(Rs 600/- per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Azeem Khalid +92-301-6005958 azeemuaf@yahoo.com COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A PROTON NMR SPECTRA Department of Chemistry In CDCl3 (Rs 2,500/-) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (Rs 5,000/- ) In CDCl3/CD3OD and D2O/CD3OD Mixture (Rs 4,000/- ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A CARBON 13 NMR SPECTRA Department of Chemistry In CDCl3 (Rs 5,000/-) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (Rs 7,000/-) In CDCl3/CD3OD and D2O/CD3OD Mixture (Rs 6,000/-) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A OFF-RESONANCE SPECTRUM Department of Chemistry In CDCl3 (Rs 6,000/-) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (Rs8,000-) In CDCl3/CD3OD and D2O/CD3OD Mixture (Rs7,000-) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A INVERSE NMR MEASUREMENTS Department of Chemistry INVERSE NMR MEASUREMENTS HMBC,HMQC, HSQC, etc. In CDCl3 (Rs 6,000/-) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (Rs 12,000/-) In CDCl3/CD3OD and D2O/CD3OD Mixture (Rs 9,000/-) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A HOMONUCLEAR 2 D Department of Chemistry HOMONUCLEAR 2 D- COSY,NOESY,TOCSY,DOSY,ROESY In CDCl3 (Rs 2,500/- ) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (Rs 5,000/- ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A 2D INADEQUATE Department of Chemistry In CDCl3 (Rs 5,000/- ) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (Rs 10,000/- ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A J-RES, X-J-RES Analysis Department of Chemistry In CDCl3 (Rs 5,000/- ) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (Rs 7,000/- ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A NOE DIFFERENCE Department of Chemistry In CDCl3 (PER EXPERIMENT) (Rs 2,500/- ) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (PER EXPERIMENT) (Rs 5,000/- ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad( COMSATS) N/A 1-D SELECTIVE COSY, NOESY ,TOCSY Analysis Department of Chemistry 1-D SELECTIVE COSY, NOESY ,TOCSY In CDCl3 (PER EXPERIMENT) (Rs 2,500/- ) In ANY OTHER DEUTERATED SOLVENT (PER EXPERIMENT) (Rs 5,000/- ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Ali Assistant Professor Department of Chemistry +92-992-383591-7; Ext. 309 muhammad_ali@ciit.net.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Probiotics testing Institute of Microbiology To check the viability of organism in probiotics (Rs.5000/sample) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Iftikhar Hussain +92-333-6512520 director.iom@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Staff test for antibiotic residue testing from Milk/Food Institute of Microbiology Staff swab test on animal food (Rs.1000/sample) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Iftikhar Hussain +92-333-6512520 director.iom@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A PCR Machine (Thermocycler) PCR Machine (Thermocycler) Multiplex PCR for klebshiella specie (Rs.1000/test) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Iftikhar Hussain +92-333-6512520 director.iom@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Thermocycler Institute of Microbiology Multiplex PCR for food borne pathogen (Rs.1000/test) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Iftikhar Hussain +92-333-6512520 director.iom@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Syber Green Real time PCR Institute of Microbiology mRNA expression analysis (Rs.300/Reaction) (minimum 100 sample in one reaction) Total plate count (Rs.700/sample) Coliform count for water food samples + total bacterial count (Rs.1000/sample) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Iftikhar Hussain +92-333-6512520 director.iom@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A ELISA Reader Institute of Microbiology ELISA for Hepatitis (Rs.1000/sample) Antibiotic Semitivity testing (Rs.300/sample) ESBL phenotypic test (Rs.100/test) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Iftikhar Hussain +92-333-6512520 director.iom@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Bacterial culture menbata Institute of Microbiology Bacterial culture menbata Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Iftikhar Hussain +92-333-6512520 director.iom@uaf.edu.pk University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Titration methods Analysis Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences CO3, HCO3, Ca+Mg, Cl, SO4, from soil and water (Test) (Rs 100/ sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. JAVAID AKHTAR +92-300-6635987 sarcuaf@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Flame photometer Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences Na+ and K+ from soil water and plant samples (Rs. 100/ sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. JAVAID AKHTAR +92-300-6635987 sarcuaf@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A EC/pH meter Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences EC and pH test (Rs. 40/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. JAVAID AKHTAR +92-300-6635987 sarcuaf@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Atomic absorption spectrophotometer Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences Metals like Cd, AS, Cr, Ni, Fe, Zn, Ca Analysis (Rs. 200/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. JAVAID AKHTAR +92-300-6635987 sarcuaf@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Spectrophotometer Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences P and Silicon Analysis (Rs. 200/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. JAVAID AKHTAR +92-300-6635987 sarcuaf@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Flame Photometer Institute of Animal Sciences Sodium & Potassium Analysis (Rs. 200/sample) Functional Flame Photometer Jenway PFP-7 NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Par Oxygen Bomb Calorimeter Institute of Animal Sciences Gross energy (Rs. 400/sample) Functional Par Oxygen Bomb Calorimeter EE Bomb-1341 caloriplain NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Muffle Furnace Institute of Animal Sciences Total ash Analysis (Rs. 200/sample) Functional Muffle Furnace Naber Therm 1310 NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Fiber Extraction Apparatus Institute of Animal Sciences Crude Fiber (Rs. 225/sample) Functional Fiber Extraction Apparatus OSK-13520 A NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Micro Kjeldhal Appratus Institute of Animal Sciences Crude protein (Rs. 250/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Soxhlet Apparatus Institute of Animal Sciences EE/crude fat (Rs. 225/sample) Functional Soxhlet Apparatus China Made NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Electric Oven Universal Memmert Institute of Animal Sciences Moisture/Dry matter (Rs. 150/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Hot Air Oven Heraeus LIT-6120 Institute of Animal Sciences Moisture/Dry matter (Rs. 150/sample) Functional Hot Air Oven Heraeus LIT-6120 NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Hot Plate Institute of Animal Sciences Neutral Detergent Fiber (NDF) (Rs. 300/sample) Acid Detergent Fiber (ADF) (Rs.300/sample) Hemicellulose (Rs.600/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Electric Grinder Institute of Animal Sciences For sample grinding Functional Electric Grinder Cylotec 1093 Tecator NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Centrifuge Machine Institute of Animal Sciences Centrifugation/Separation Functional Centrifuge Machine Fisher Scientific Model 225 NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A pH meter Institute of Animal Sciences Functional pH meter Ohaus Starter-3000 NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Microscope Institute of Animal Sciences Microscopic study Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Fluorescence Spectrophotometer Institute of Animal Sciences For studying fluorescent substances Functional Fluorescence Spectrophotometer F-2000 HITACHI (Japan) NA 1 PROF. DR. EHSAN UL HAQ +92-300-9653214 deanhaqfah@gmail.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Thermocycler Molecular Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry PCR reaction (primers to be supplied by customer) (Rs 1000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Amer Jamil +92-41-9200161-9 amerjamil@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Horizontal electrophoresis Molecular Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Agarose gel electrophoresis/sample (Rs. 750/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Amer Jamil +92-41-9200161-9 amerjamil@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Horizontal electrophoresis Molecular Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Agarose gel electrophoresis/10 samples (Rs. 1500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Amer Jamil +92-41-9200161-9 amerjamil@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Centrifuge machine Molecular Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry DNA isolation from plants/blood/bacteria (Isolation only) (Rs. 1250 /sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Amer Jamil +92-41-9200161-9 amerjamil@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Vertical gel electrophoresis Molecular Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry PAGE for proteins per sample with coomassie stain (Isolation only) (Rs. 1100/sample) PAGE for proteins per 9 samples with coomassie stain (Rs. 3100 /sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Amer Jamil +92-41-9200161-9 amerjamil@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A UV-visible spectrophotometer/Microplate reader Bioassay Section, Medicinal Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Biochemical parameters (Rs. 200/- per sample) Like enzymes CAT, POD, SOD, TSS, Sugars etc (Rs. 250/-per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Shahid +92-41-9200161-9 mshahiduaf@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A ELISA reader Bioassay Section, Medicinal Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Antimicrobial activities (Rs. 500/- per sample ) (against at least two bacterial and two fungal strains) (For MIC Rs.200/- per sample ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Shahid +92-41-9200161-9 mshahiduaf@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A UV-visible spectrophotometer/Microplate reader Bioassay Section, Medicinal Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Biofilm inhibition and hydrolysis (Rs. 300/- per sample against one microbial biofilm.) For light microscopy (Rs. 200/- per sample ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Shahid +92-41-9200161-9 mshahiduaf@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A ELISA reader Bioassay Section, Medicinal Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Hemolytic assay (Rs. 200/ sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Shahid +92-41-9200161-9 mshahiduaf@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Microscope Bioassay Section, Medicinal Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Brine shrimp assay (Rs. 500/ sample) Allium cepa test Rs. 1000/ sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Shahid +92-41-9200161-9 mshahiduaf@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Electrophoresis and gel documentation system Bioassay Section, Medicinal Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry DNA damage (Rs. 2000/- per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Shahid +92-41-9200161-9 mshahiduaf@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Plate counter Bioassay Section, Medicinal Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Ames Assays (Rs. 2000/- per sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Shahid +92-41-9200161-9 mshahiduaf@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Colony reader Bioassay Section, Medicinal Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry Microbial load (Rs. 1000/ sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Muhammad Shahid +92-41-9200161-9 mshahiduaf@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Hot air oven National Institute of Food Science and Technology Moisture contents (Rs. 100/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Muffle furnace National Institute of Food Science and Technology Ash contents (Rs. 100/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Kjeldhal apparatus National Institute of Food Science and Technology Crude protein (Rs. 400/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Soxhlet apparatus National Institute of Food Science and Technology Crude fat (Rs. 400/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Fiber tech National Institute of Food Science and Technology Crude fiber (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Inframetic National Institute of Food Science and Technology Grain analysis (Rs. 1000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Farinograph National Institute of Food Science and Technology Farinograph (Rs. 1000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Mixograph National Institute of Food Science and Technology Mixograph (Rs. 700/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Falling number equipment National Institute of Food Science and Technology Falling number (Rs. 1000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A ELISA National Institute of Food Science and Technology ELISA (Rs. 1000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Rancimeter National Institute of Food Science and Technology Rancidity test (Rs. 1000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Titration National Institute of Food Science and Technology Peroxide value (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Spectrophotometer National Institute of Food Science and Technology Antioxidant activity test (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Gas Chromatography-FID National Institute of Food Science and Technology Fatty acid profile (Rs. 7000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Gas Chromatogram-Mass Spectrometer (GC-MS) National Institute of Food Science and Technology Volatile compounds (Rs. 7000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A High Performance Liquid Chromatography - HPLC National Institute of Food Science and Technology Phenolic compounds (Rs. 7000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Electrophoresis National Institute of Food Science and Technology Electrophoresis (Rs. 6000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer National Institute of Food Science and Technology Mineral analysis 1-20 samples (Rs. 80/sample/element) 21-50 samples (Rs. 60/sample/element) Above 50 samples (Rs. 30/sample/element) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Lactometer National Institute of Food Science and Technology Lactose (Rs. 1000/sample) Milk SNF (Rs. 100/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Gerber method National Institute of Food Science and Technology Milk fat (Rs. 200/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A pH meter National Institute of Food Science and Technology pH (Rs. 100/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Pycnometer National Institute of Food Science and Technology Specific gravity (Rs. 100/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Colony counter/incubator National Institute of Food Science and Technology Total plate count (Bacteria, Mold % Yeast) (Rs. 1000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A GC & HPLC National Institute of Food Science and Technology Pesticides (Rs. 10000/sample/group) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Refractro-meter National Institute of Food Science and Technology Refractive index (Rs. 300/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Texture analyzer National Institute of Food Science and Technology Textural analysis (Rs. 1200/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Lactoscan National Institute of Food Science and Technology Milk analysis (Rs. 1000/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Viscometer National Institute of Food Science and Technology Viscosity (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Bomb Calorimeter National Institute of Food Science and Technology Energy value (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad N/A Fourier Transform Infra-Red Spectrophotometer (FT-IR ) National Institute of Food Science and Technology FT-IR analysis (800/sample) Functional NA 1 PROF. DR. MASOOD SADIQ BUTT +92-300-6622685 drmsbutt@yahoo.com Government College University , Lahore (GCU) N/A Thermocycler (PCR Machine) Department of Zoology Amplification of Gene (Rs. 5000/- per sample) Functional NA 1 Prof. Dr. Nusrat Jahan Chairperson +92-42-111-000-010 Ext. 319 dr.nusratjahan@gcu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Synthetic Fiber Development NTU Research Lab Electrospinnig/100 Ml, Wet spinning, and melt spinning (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fabric Development NTU Research Lab Cone/2kg Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fabric Knitting (5-10 Kg) NTU Research Lab according to nature of test Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Cone Dyeing NTU Research Lab Yarn/as per requirement (Rs. 10,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fibre Composition of Textiles NTU Research Lab Quantitative (10g) and Qualitative(10g) Test (Rs . 600/- and 1,500/- respectively ) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Oil Content of Jute NTU Research Lab Oil Content of Jute test (10g) (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Cotton Fineness NTU Research Lab 100 g Cotton (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Cotton Length and Length Uniformity NTU Research Lab 100 g Cotton (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Cotton Breaking Strength by Pressley Tester. NTU Research Lab 100 g Cotton (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Cotton Moisture Content NTU Research Lab Cotton Moisture Content test 100 g Cotton (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Cotton Trash Content NTU Research Lab Cotton Trash Content test 100 g Cotton (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fibre Moisture Content NTU Research Lab Fibre Moisture Content 100 g Cotton (Rs. 800/ sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Cotton Fibre Tests (HVI) NTU Research Lab Cotton Fibre Tests (HVI) 100 g Cotton (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Yarn Count & Unevenness NTU Research Lab Yarn Count 2 packages (Rs.500/sample) Yarn Unevenness Yarn/400 m (Rs. 1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Linear Density by Skein Method NTU Research Lab Linear Density by Skein Method 4.25 lb yarn (Rs. 400/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Linear Density by Short Length Method NTU Research Lab Linear Density by Short Length Method 1 m fabric (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Tensile Properties of Single Yarn NTU Research Lab Tensile Properties of Single Yarn 4.25 lb yarn (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Lea Breaking Strength NTU Research Lab Lea Breaking Strength test 4.25 lb yarn (Rs. 400/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Twist by Contraction Method NTU Research Lab Twist by Contraction Method 4.25 lb yarn (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Twist by Direct Method NTU Research Lab Twist by Direct Method 4.25 lb yarn (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Classification of Yarn Faults NTU Research Lab Classification of Yarn Faults 4.25 lb yarn (Rs. 1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Yarn Length on Package NTU Research Lab Yarn Length on Package 4.25 lb yarn (rs. 2,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Yarn Crimp and Yarn Take-up in Woven Fabric NTU Research Lab Yarn Crimp and Yarn Take-up in Woven Fabric 1lb yarn (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Yarn Type Analysis NTU Research Lab Yarn Type Analysis 2.5lb yarn (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fabric Width NTU Research Lab Fabric Width 2 m (Rs. 300/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fabric GSM NTU Research Lab Fabric GSM 0.5 m (Rs. 300/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fabric Construction NTU Research Lab Fabric Construction 0.5 m (Rs. 400/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Type of weave NTU Research Lab Type of weave 0.5 m (Rs. 1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Pilling Resistance by Martindale Tester NTU Research Lab Pilling Resistance by Martindale Tester 0.5 m (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Pilling Resistance by ICI Method NTU Research Lab Pilling Resistance by ICI Method 0.5 m (Rs. 1,200/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Breaking Strength by Grab Method NTU Research Lab Breaking Strength by Grab Method (0.5 m) (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Crease Recovery of Woven Fabric NTU Research Lab Crease Recovery of Woven Fabric (0.5 m) (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Dimensional Stability to Washing NTU Research Lab Dimensional Stability to Washing (2 m) (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Skew Change (After Washing) NTU Research Lab Skew Change (After Washing) (1 m) (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Smoothness Appearance Test (After Washing) NTU Research Lab Smoothness Appearance (After Washing) (1 m) (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Tensile Strength Test NTU Research Lab Tensile Strength (1 m) (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Soil Release of Fabric NTU Research Lab Soil Release of Fabric (1 m) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Color Evalauation test by Spectrophotometer NTU Research Lab Color Evaluation by Spectrophotometer (1 m) Rs. (500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Breaking Strength by Strip Method NTU Research Lab Breaking Strength by Strip Method (1 m) (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Breaking Strength of Jute Bag by Strip Method NTU Research Lab Breaking Strength of Jute Bag by Strip Method (1 m) (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Seam Strength of Jute Bag NTU Research Lab Seam Strength of Jute Bag (Fiber/40X10cm) (Rs. 400/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Weave and Design of Fabric NTU Research Lab Weave and Design of Fabric (0.5 m) (Rs.1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Gauge of Knitting Machine NTU Research Lab Gauge of Knitting Machine (5*5 inch square) (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Courses and Wales of Knitted Fabric NTU Research Lab Courses and Wales of Knitted Fabric (5*5 inch square) (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Thickness of Fabric NTU Research Lab Functional Thickness of Fabric (half meter) (Rs. 300/sample) NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Bow and Skew in fabric NTU Research Lab Bow and Skew in fabric 1 m (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Colour Fastness to Water NTU Research Lab Colour Fastness to Water (0.5 m) (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Dye-ability Test NTU Research Lab Dye-ability Test (according to nature of test) (Rs. 2,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Colour Fastness to Perspiration NTU Research Lab Colour Fastness to Perspiration (10*4 cm) (Rs. 1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Colour Fastness to Washing NTU Research Lab Colour Fastness to Washing (10*4 cm) (Rs.1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Colour Fastness to Dry Cleaning NTU Research Lab Colour Fastness to Dry Cleaning (5*15 cm) (Rs. 1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Colour Fastness to Light NTU Research Lab Colour Fastness to Light (4.5*17cm) (Rs. 3,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Colour Fastness to Crocking NTU Research Lab Colour Fastness to Crocking (according to nature of test) (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Absorbency of Bleached Textiles NTU Research Lab Absorbency of Bleached Textiles (according to nature of test) (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fault in Cloth test NTU Research Lab Fault in Cloth (15-20 m) (Rs. 6,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Origin of Cloth (Analysis) NTU Research Lab Functional Origin of Cloth (Analysis) (0.5 m) (Rs. 2,000/sample) NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Blend Ratio of fabric (2 Components) NTU Research Lab Blend Ratio of fabric (2 Components) (10 g) (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Identification of yarn/Fabric NTU Research Lab Identification of yarn/Fabric (10 g) (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Percentage of yarn in fabric (per side) NTU Research Lab Percentage of yarn in fabric (per side) (0.5 m) (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Seam Strength Test NTU Research Lab Seam Strength Test (1 m) (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Button Strength Test NTU Research Lab Button Strength (10) (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Zip Strength Test NTU Research Lab Zip Strength Test 0.5 m (Rs. 600/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Thermal Properties of fabric NTU Research Lab Thermal Properties of fabric Fabric, (blanket,wadding/12X12 inch) (Rs. 2,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Air Permeability Test NTU Research Lab Air Permeability Test (Fabric/20cm2) (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fabric Touch Properties NTU Research Lab Fabric Touch Properties (12X12 inch) (Rs. 4,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fabric Stiffness Analysis NTU Research Lab Fabric Stiffness (10x20 cm) (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A MMT (Moisture Management Tester) NTU Research Lab MMT (Moisture Management Tester) (100 cm) (Rs.1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Water Vapor Permeability (Analysis) NTU Research Lab Water Vapor Permeability (100 cm2 ) (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Kawa bata Bending Test NTU Research Lab Kawa bata Bending Test (12X12 inch) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Kawa bata compression Test NTU Research Lab Kawa bata compression Test (12X12 inch) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Kawa bata Surface Test NTU Research Lab Kawa bata Surface Test (12X12 inch) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Kawa bata Thermal Test NTU Research Lab Kawa bata Thermal Test (12X12 inch) (Rs. 3,000sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Vertical Flammability Test NTU Research Lab Vertical Flammability Test (Fabric/5X20 cm) (Rs. 1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Loss on ignition (LOI) NTU Research Lab Loss on ignition (LOI) (Fabric, Films/10X20) (Rs. 10,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Static Charge Test (Conductivity Tester) NTU Research Lab Static Charge Test (Conductivity Tester) (Fabric, Films, Membranes/GSM (100cm2) Size) (Rs.1,500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A UV/Sun Protection Factor Test NTU Research Lab UV/Sun Protection Factor Test (Fabric, Liquid solutions/2X2 inch or 20 Ml) (Rs. 1,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Wrinkle Recovery Test NTU Research Lab Wrinkle Recovery Test (Fabric/20 X30 cm) (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A HOMONUCLEAR 2 D Water Repellency Test (Spray Method) Water Repellency Test (Spray Method) (Fabric/15x15 inchs) (Rs. 500/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Water Resistance of Fabric (Hydrostatic Head Tester) NTU Research Lab Water Resistance of Fabric (Hydrostatic Head Tester) (Fabric/150 cm2) (Rs. 3,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Antimicrobial Test Qualitative NTU Research Lab Antimicrobial Test Qualitative (Fabric 5*5 inches) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Antimicrobial Test Quantitative NTU Research Lab Antimicrobial Test Quantitative (Fabric 5*5 inches) (Rs. 5,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A X-Ray Differaction (XRD) NTU Research Lab X-Ray Differaction (XRD) (Well crused or homogenous powder/1g minimum) (Rs. 3,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) NTU Research Lab Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Pelletes, Films, Membranes, Fabric, Composite materials/0.5 X 0.5 inchs) (Rs. 3,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDX) NTU Research Lab Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDX) (Same as SEM) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Atomic Absorption (Analysis) NTU Research Lab Atomic Absorption ( Liquid solution/20 Ml minimum) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Particle size Analysis (Zeta) NTU Research Lab Particle size Analysis (Zeta) (liquid suspension or dispersion/ upto 3 Ml) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) NTU Research Lab FTIR (Solid or liquid/ 0.5g or 1ml minimum) (Rs. 2,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Electro-Kinetic Potential NTU Research Lab Electro-Kinetic Potential (Film, membrane, fabric, yarn/5X5 cm) (Rs. 8,000/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Viscosity of Solutions NTU Research Lab Viscosity of Solutions (Liquid/50 Ml) (Rs. 800/sample) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Surface Tension Tester NTU Research Lab Surface Tension Tester (Liquid/100 Ml minimum) (Rs. 2,000/-) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A pH of Water-Extract from Textile (Analysis) NTU Research Lab pH of Water-Extract from Textile (10 g) (Rs. 800/-) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Nature of Dye (Test) NTU Research Lab Nature of Dye (0.5 m) (Rs. 1,000/-) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Evaluation of Printing Thickener/Binder (Analysis) NTU Research Lab Evaluation of Printing Thickener/Binder (Rs. 2,000-4,000/- ) NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC +92-41-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Chemical Comparison (Analysis) NTU Research Lab Chemical Comparison Analysis (Rs. 2000/- to 4000/-) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk National Textile University , Faisalabad (NTU) N/A Purity of Chemicals (Analysis) NTU Research Lab Purity of Chemicals (Analysis) (Rs. 800/-) Functional NA 1 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Director ORIC 041-9230081-90 Ext: 191 ahsan@ntu.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Postmortem for poultry (Test) University Diagnostic Laboratory Standard Method from Book "Diseases of Poultry" (Rs. 100/sample) Functional Postmortem table, Surgical instruments (Scissors, foreceps, knives, etc) NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Culture sensitivity Test University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE (Rs. 200/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Balance, pH meter NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Viable bacterial count (water, feed, feed ingredients, Hatchery fluff, etc.) Test University Diagnostic Laboratory FAO Viable bacterial count (water, feed, feed ingredients, Hatchery fluff, etc. (Rs. 250/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk Council for Work and Housing Research(CWHR) N/A Coliform count Test University Diagnostic Laboratory FAO Coliform count Test ( Rs. 250/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Isolation and identification of Salmonella (Species) Test University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE Isolation and identification of Salmonella (Species) Test (Rs. 600/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Isolation and identification of Staphylococcus (Species) University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE Isolation and identification of Staphylococcus (Species) (Rs. 600/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A MG culturing and identificationMycoplasma gallisepticum (Analysis) University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE MG culturing and identificationMycoplasma gallisepticum (Rs. 600/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Plate exposure for bacteria (Environmental testing) / swab testing University Diagnostic Laboratory FAO Plate exposure for bacteria (Environmental testing) / swab testing (Rs. 600/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Antibacterial activity of disinfectant University Diagnostic Laboratory FAO Antibacterial activity of disinfectant (Rs. 1500/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Isolation and identification of Avian Influenza (AI) virus & New Castle disease (ND) Virus University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE Isolation and identification of Avian Influenza (AI) virus & New Castle disease (ND) Virus (Rs. 1500/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter, Egg Candler NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Infectious bronchitis, IB (M-41) antigen for HI antibody titres (Test) University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE Infectious bronchitis, IB (M-41) antigen for HI antibody titres (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Infectious bronchitis, IB (D-274) antigen for HI antibody titres (Test) University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE Infectious bronchitis, IB (D-274) antigen for HI antibody titres (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Infectious bronchitis, IB (D-1466) antigen for HI antibody titres (Test) University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE, Infectious bronchitis, IB (D-1466) antigen for HI antibody titres (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies against IBD (Gumboro) virus University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies against IBD (Gumboro) virus (Rs.150/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies againstMycoplasma gallisepticum University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies againstMycoplasma gallisepticum(Rs. 100/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies againstMycoplasma synoveae University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies againstMycoplasma synoveae (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Salmonella pullorum antigen for spot test (Imported) University Diagnostic Laboratory Salmonella pullorum antigen for spot test (Imported) (Rs. 75/Sample) Functional Rocker, Micropipette, Safety cabinet NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A HI Test for antibodies against New castle disease (ND) University Diagnostic Laboratory HI Test for antibodies against New castle disease (ND), Avian Influenza (AI), Egg Drop Syndrome (EDS) viruses Functional pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Agar gel precipitation test (Qualitative) University Diagnostic Laboratory Agar gel precipitation test (Qualitative), (1-4 Samples) (Rs. 300/Sample) Functional Hot air oven, Autoclave, Incubator, Bunsen burner, Safety cabinet, Micropipette, Balance, pH meter, Suction pump, chiller NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Indirect Fluorescent antibody test (iFAT) University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE, Indirect Fluorescent antibody test (iFAT) (Rs. 600/sample) Functional Safety cabinet, Micropipettes, Refrigerators, Florescent Microscope NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Fowl Cholera University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Fowl Cholera (Rs. 160/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Chicken Anemia Agent (CAA) (Test) University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Chicken Anemia Agent (CAA) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Inf. Laryngotracheitis (ILT) virus University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Inf. Laryngotracheitis (ILT) virus (Rs. 160/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Reovirus University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Reovirus (Rs. 150/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Lymphoid leucosis University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Lymphoid leucosis (Rs. 150/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Foot & Mouth Disease Virus (FMDV) University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies against Foot & Mouth Disease Virus (FMDV), (Specific for Cattle & Buffalo) (Rs. 500/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Rose Bengal Plate test for brucellosis University Diagnostic Laboratory Rose Bengal Plate test for brucellosis (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional Rocker, Micropipette, Safety cabinet NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Rose Bengal Brucella antigen for plate test (Imported antigen) University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE, Rose Bengal Brucella antigen for plate test (Imported antigen) (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional Rocker, Micropipette, Safety cabinet NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Brucella Tube Agglutination test (SAT) University Diagnostic Laboratory Brucella Tube Agglutination test (SAT) (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional Micropipette, Safety cabinet NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A HA test for exam; to confirm the presence of Canine Parvovirus (CPV) per sample University Diagnostic Laboratory HA test for exam; to confirm the presence of Canine Parvovirus (CPV) per sample (Rs. 150/Sample) Functional pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A HI test for determining antibody titer against Canine Parvovirus (CPV) in dog serum University Diagnostic Laboratory HI test for determining antibody titer against Canine Parvovirus (CPV) in dog serum (Rs. 200/Sample) Functional pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Antibodies of Canine Parvovirus & Canine Distemper University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Antibodies of Canine Parvovirus & Canine Distemper (Rs. 1500/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA for detection of Rabies antibodies University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Rabies antibodies (Rs. 2000/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Tuberculin test (imported antigen) for detection of Tuberculosis University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE, Tuberculin test (imported antigen) for detection of Tuberculosis (Rs. 300/Sample) Functional Disposable syringe NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Tuberculin test (local antigen) for detection of Tuberculosis University Diagnostic Laboratory OIE, Tuberculin test (local antigen) for detection of Tuberculosis (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional Disposable syringe NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A ELISA Test for detection of Johnes disease University Diagnostic Laboratory ELISA for detection of Johnes disease (Rs. 500/Sample) Functional ELISA reader, pH meter, Micropipettes, Incubator, Refrigerator NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Mallein test for detection of Glanders in equines University Diagnostic Laboratory Mallein test for detection of Glanders in equines (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional Disposable syringe NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Blood test for parasite (Haemoparasites) University Diagnostic Laboratory Blood test for parasite (Haemoparasites) (Rs. 100/Sample) Functional Microscope NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Complete blood count (Haematological Analyzer) University Diagnostic Laboratory Complete blood count (Haematological Analyzer) Functional Hematological analyzer NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A White side / surf test for early detection of mastitis University Diagnostic Laboratory White side / surf test for early detection of mastitis (Rs. 50/Sample) Functional Micropipette NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Fecal examination for parasites ova detection (Analysis) University Diagnostic Laboratory Fecal examination for parasites ova detection Functional Microscope NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Skin scrapping for detection of ectoparasites (Test) University Diagnostic Laboratory Skin scrapping for detection of ectoparasites (Rs. 50/Sample) Functional Microscope NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for diagnosis of Bird flu (H5N1) virus University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for diagnosis of Bird flu (H5N1) virus Functional Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for diagnosis of Avian Influenza (H9N2) virus University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for diagnosis of Avian Influenza (H9N2) virus (R. 2500/Sample) Functional Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for diagnosis of Avian Influenza (H7N3) virus University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for diagnosis of Avian Influenza (H7N3) virus (Rs. 2500/Sample) Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for diagnosis of ND virus University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for diagnosis of ND virus (Rs. 2500/Sample) Functional Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for diagnosis of Rabies virus University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for diagnosis of Rabies virus Functional Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for diagnosis of Canine Distemper virus University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for diagnosis of Canine Distemper virus (Rs. 2500/Sample) Functional Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for diagnosis of Canine Parvo virus University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for diagnosis of Canine Parvo virus (Rs. 2500/Sample) Functional Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for diagnosis of Mycoplasma gallisepticum University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for diagnosis of Mycoplasma gallisepticum (Rs. 2500/Sample) Functional Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A PCR for other DNA & RNA viruses University Diagnostic Laboratory PCR for other DNA & RNA viruses Functional Thermocycler, Electrophoresis apparatus, Micropipettes, Refrigerated Centrifuge machine, NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Liver Function Test (LFT) University Diagnostic Laboratory Liver Function Test (LFT) (Rs. 500/Sample) Functional Chemistry Analyzer, Micropipette NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences , Lahore(UVAS) N/A Renal Function Test (RFT) University Diagnostic Laboratory Renal Function Test Functional Chemistry Analyzer, Micropipette NA 1 Prof. Dr. Masood Rabbani +92-42-99212594 mrabbani@uvas.edu.pk National Institute of Electronics(NIE) View ToE fsdf rwerwr sdfsdfsdf Functional werwerwer 1 sdfsdfdsff rwerwer sdfsdfsfdsff Government College University , Lahore (GCU) N/A LCR meter Thin Film Laboratory Parameters:Cs-Rs,Cs-D,Cp-Rp,Cp-D,Lp-Rp,Lp-Q,Ls-Rs,Ls-Q,G-B,R-X,Z-?rad,Z-?deg,DCR Monitor Parameters: Z, D, Q, ?r, ?d, R, X, G, B, Y, Vac, Iac, ?, ?% Accuracy:0.1% 5 dgt Frequency: 50Hz -200kHz (37 point with resolution of 0.001Hz) Display Range: L: 0.00001H-999999H C: 0.00001pF - 999999F R,Z: 0.00001 - 99.9999MO D: 0.00001 - 9.99999 Q: 0.00001 - 99999.9 ?(deg): -179.999 -179.999 ?(rad): -3.14159 3.14159 ?%: -999999% - 999999% DCR:0.00001O ~99.9999MO Functional Applent Instruments AT2818 Precision LCR Meter 5 UMT lahore 1 Dr. Qayyum Zafar Associate Professor Department of Physics (SSC) University of Management and Technology C-II, Johar Town, Lahore, Pakistan. Tel:+92 42 111 300 200 Ext: 3610 Cell: +92 313 4567308 Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | R&D Projects in Pakistan - Research & Innovation Database Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES R&D Projects Title: Discipline: Select Discipline... Agricultural Sciences Biological Sciences Chemical Sciences Earth Sciences Engineering Sciences Environmental Sciences Health Sciences Information Technology Mathematics & Statistics Physics Social Sciences Any other Multidisciplinary Status: Both On Going Completed Select Affiliation Type: University/Institute Organization University/Institution: Select University/Institution.... Women University Mardan [MARDAN] Dawood University of Engineering & Technology [KARACHI] Centre for Bio-Sensors Research and Development [LAHORE] Institute of Space Technology [ISLAMABAD] Muslim Youth University [ISLAMABAD] Institute of Business Management [KARACHI] Institute of Business Administration [KARACHI] Isra University, Hyderabad [HYDERABAD] Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture [MULTAN] University of Education (Jauharabad Campus) [JAUHARABAD] COMSATS University (Attock Campus) [ATTOCK] College of Agriculture [SARGODHA] Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology [RAHIM YAR KHAN] University of Malakand [MALAKAND] Sukkur Institute of Business Administration [SUKKUR] University of Agriculture [FAISALABAD] International Islamic University [ISLAMABAD] Jinnah University for Women [KARACHI] Gomal University [DERA ISMAIL KHAN] Air University [ISLAMABAD] Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences [LASBELLA] Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University [UPPER DIR] COMSATS University (Wah Campus) [WAH] Bahria University (Karachi Campus) [KARACHI] IslamabadModelPostgraduate CollegeH-8 [ISLAMABAD] Punjab University College of Pharmacy [LAHORE] Khyber Medical University [PESHAWAR] University of Education (Vehari Campus) [VEHARI] Lahore College for Women University [LAHORE] School of Civil & Environmental Engineering [ISLAMABAD] Centre for Applied Molecular Biology [LAHORE] University of Engineering & Technology [LAHORE] Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences [SHAHEED BENAZIRABAD] Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences [BAHAWALPUR] Pakistan Navy Engineering College [KARACHI] Women Medical College [ABBOTTABAD] Fatima Jinnah Women University [RAWALPINDI] Zia-ud-Din University [KARACHI] Shaikh Zayed Federal Postgraduate Medical Institute [LAHORE] National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences [ISLAMABAD] Khushal Khan Khattak University [KARAK] University of FATA [KOHAT] Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Medical University [ISLAMABAD] University of the Punjab [LAHORE] University of Swabi [SWABI] University of Science & Technology [BANNU] Baqai Medical University [KARACHI] University of the Punjab (Allama Iqbal Campus/Old Campus) [LAHORE] COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) [SAHIWAL] University of Buner [BUNER] Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University [PESHAWAR] Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology [KARACHI] Foundation University [ISLAMABAD] University of Gujrat [GUJRAT] University of Education (Dera Ghazi Khan Campus) [DERA GHAZI KHAN] Sindh Agriculture University [HYDERABAD] University Institute of Information Technology [RAWALPINDI] National University of Modern Languages [ISLAMABAD] Fatima Jinnah Medical University [LAHORE] Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology [KHUZDAR] Gambat Institute of Medical Sciences [KHAIRPUR MIRS] Institute of Management Sciences [LAHORE] Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Engineering & Technology [MULTAN] University of Sindh [JAMSHORO] Information Technology University of the Punjab [LAHORE] Government College for Women University [SIALKOT] National Defense University [ISLAMABAD] Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology [SWABI] Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) [KARACHI] University of Wah [RAWALPINDI] Sindh Madresatul Islam University [KARACHI] Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology is listed as Federal Urdu University of Arts [ISLAMABAD] Institute of Business Administration (IBA) [LAHORE] Institute of Management Sciences [PESHAWAR] University of Art and Culture [JAMSHORO] Women University [SWABI] Islamia University [BAHAWALPUR] University of Education (Lower Mall Campus) [LAHORE] University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir [KOTLI] Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering [SHAHEED BENAZIRABAD] Abdul Wali Khan University [MARDAN] Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences [ISLAMABAD] College of Electrical & Mechanical Engineering [RAWALPINDI] University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) [LAHORE] Hazara University [MANSEHRA] University of Peshawar [PESHAWAR] University of Education (Faisalabad Campus) [FAISALABAD] Central Parks Medical College [LAHORE] COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) [VEHARI] Bahauddin Zakariya University [MULTAN] University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences [LAHORE] Forman Christian College [LAHORE] University of Balochistan [QUETTA] University of Engineering & Technology [PESHAWAR] Bahria University [ISLAMABAD] COMSATS Institute of Information Technology [ISLAMABAD] University of Health Sciences [LAHORE] University of Karachi [KARACHI] Allama Iqbal Open University [ISLAMABAD] Mirpur University of Science & Technology [MIRPUR KHAS] National University of Sciences & Technology [ISLAMABAD] Riphah International University [ISLAMABAD] The Islamia College [PESHAWAR] Abbottabad University of Science and Technology [ABBOTTABAD] Government College for Women University [FAISALABAD] Government Talim-ul-Islam College, Rabwah [FAISALABAD] Habib University [KARACHI] University of Education [LAHORE] Government College University [FAISALABAD] Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University [QUETTA] University of Agriculture (Burewala Campus) [BUREWALA] NED University of Engineering & Technology [KARACHI] University of Swat [SWAT] CECOS University of Information Technology & Emerging Sciences [PESHAWAR] Women University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir [BAGH] Government College University [HYDERABAD] Khyber Medical College [PESHAWAR] Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology [KARACHI] Iqra University [KARACHI] Government College University [LAHORE] Lahore University of Management Sciences [LAHORE] Aga Khan University [KARACHI] University of the Poonch [POONCH] University of Lahore [LAHORE] National Skills University [ISLAMABAD] Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology [ISLAMABAD] Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences [QUETTA] National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Karachi Campus) [KARACHI] National Institute of Food Science and Technology [FAISALABAD] Mehran University of Engineering & Technology [JAMSHORO] Mehran University Institute of Science & Technology Development [JAMSHORO] HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry [KARACHI] University of Education (Multan Campus) [MULTAN] University of Gujrat (RawalpindiCampus) [RAWALPINDI] University of Engineering & Technology [TAXILA CANTT] Government Boys Degree College, Abbaspur [POONCH] COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) [ABBOTTABAD] National University of Medical Sciences [RAWALPINDI] Kinnaird College for Women [LAHORE] National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Peshawar Campus) [PESHAWAR] University of Agriculture (Depalpur Campus) [DEPALPUR] The Women University [MULTAN] Army Medical College [RAWALPINDI] National College of Business Administration & Economics [LAHORE] Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences [JAMSHORO] Abasyn University [PESHAWAR] King Edward Medical University [LAHORE] Virtual University of Pakistan [LAHORE] Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research [KARACHI] Military College of Engineering [RISALPUR] COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) [LAHORE] Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University [RAWALPINDI] University of Central Punjab [LAHORE] University of Baltistan [SKARDU] Karachi Institute of Technology and Entrepreneurship (KITE) [KARACHI] Bahauddin Zakariya University (Layyah Campus) [LAYYAH] The University of Agriculture Peshawar [PESHAWAR] University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir [MUZAFFARABAD] Government Sadiq College Women University [BAHAWALPUR] University of Sargodha [SARGODHA] University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) [JHANG] Bacha Khan University [CHARSADA] Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology [PESHAWAR] Gomal Medical College [DERA ISMAIL KHAN] DOW University of Health Sciences [KARACHI] Preston University [KOHAT] Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Abdul Haq Campus) [KARACHI] Qarshi University [LAHORE] Capital University of Science & Technology [ISLAMABAD] Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University [SHAHEED BENAZIRABAD] Lahore Garrison University [LAHORE] Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center [KARACHI] University of Turbat [TURBAT] University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) [PATOKI] National Textile University [FAISALABAD] Sir Syed (CASE) Institute of Technology [ISLAMABAD] Shah Abdul Latif University [KHAIRPUR MIRS] Government Degree College [HARIPUR] The University of Faisalabad [FAISALABAD] Kohat University of Science and Technology [KOHAT] Karakurum International University [GILGIT] University of Haripur [HARIPUR] Abasyn University (Islamabad Campus) [ISLAMABAD] Ghazi University [DERA GHAZI KHAN] University of Management & Technology [LAHORE] Organization: Select Organization.... A.O. Hospital Abbas Institute of Medical Sciences Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute (ABRI), AARI Agricultural Economics Research Institute (AERI), NARC-PARC Agricultural Mechanization Research Institute Agricultural Research Institute Agricultural Research Institute (North) Mingora Agricultural Research Institute, PARC-BARDC Agricultural Research Institute, Tarnab Agricultural Research Station Ahmad Wala Agriculture Department Agriculture Department, Gojra Agriculture Poly Technique Institute (API) , NARC-PARC Agriculture Research Institute Agriculture Research Sindh, Tandojam Agronomic Research Institute (ARI), AARI Agronomic Research Station Animal Sciences Institute (ASI) , NARC-PARC Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI), AARI Ayub Agricultural Research Institute (AARI) Barani Agricultural Research Institute (BARI), AARI Barani Agricultural Research Station, Jarma Barani Livestock Production Research Institute, Kherimurat, Fateh Jang Central Cotton Research Institute Central Cotton Research Institute Cereal Crops Research Institute (Ccri), Pirsabak Climate Change Research Centre (CCRC), AARI Climate, Energy and Water Research Institute (CEWRI) , NARC-PARC Coastal Research Institute, PARC-BARDC CottonResearch Institute (CRI), AARI Council for Works and Housing Research (CWHR) Crop Sciences Institute (CSI) , NARC-PARC Department of Animal Husbandary Director (Inland) Fisheries Directorate of Animal Husbandry Directorate of Livestock (Planning & Monitoring) Directorate of Livestock and Dairy Development Directorate of Livestock Farms Directorate of Poultry Production & Research Directorate of Science and Technology (DoST) Disease Investigation Lab Disease Investigation Lab Drainage and Reclamation Institute of Pakistan, Tandojam Fish Seed Hatchery (Government of Punjab), Rawal Town Fodder Research Institute (FRI), AARI Food Science Research Institute (FSRI) , NARC-PARC Geological Survey of Pakistan (GSP) Government of Sindh, Karachi, Pakistan Hazara Agriculture Research Station (HARS), (previously Potato Research Centre) Horticulture Research Institute (HRI) , NARC-PARC Horticulture Research Institute, PARC-BARDC Institute of Agri-Biotechnology & Genetic Resources (IABGR), Land Resources Research Institute (LRRI) , NARC-PARC Livestock and Dairy Development Department Livestock Development and Research Farm for Kundhi Buffaloes, Rohri Livestock Production and Research Institute, Bahadurnagar Livestock Research and Dairy Development Livestock Research Institute, PARC-BARDC, Turbat Maize & Millets Research Institute (MMRI), AARI Mango Research Institute (MRI), AARI National Centre for Physics (NCP) National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases(NICVD) National Institute of Electronics (NIE) National Institute of Health (NIH) National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) NFC Institute of Engineering & Technology NIAB Animal Sciences Division (ASD), PAEC NIAB Plant Breeding & Genetics Division (PBGD), PAEC NIAB Plant Protection Division (PPD), PAEC NIAB Soil & Environmental Sciences Division (SESD), PAEC NIBGE Industrial Biotechnology Division, PAEC NIBGE Agricultural Biotechnology Division, PAEC NIBGE Soil and Environmental Biotechnology Division, PAEC NIFA Food and Nutrition Division, PAEC NIFA Plant Breeding and Genetics Division, PAEC NIFA Plant Protection/Entomology Division, PAEC Oilseeds Research Institute (ORI), AARI PAEC National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE) PAEC Nuclear Institute for Agriculture and Biology (NIAB) PAEC Nuclear Institute for Food and Agriculture (NIFA) PAEC Nuclear Institute of Agriculture (NIA),Tandojam PAEC Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science & Technology (PINSTECH), Nilore Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) Pakistan Council for Research in Water Resources (PCRWR) Pakistan Council for Science and Technology (PCST) Pakistan Council of Renewable Energy Technologies (PCRET) Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR) Pakistan Forest Institute (PFI Pakistan Museum of Natural History (PMNH), PSF PARC Agricultural Research Station PARC Arid Zone Research Centre, Rata Kulachi PARC Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI) PARC Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI) PARC Balochistan Agricultural Research & Development Center (BARDC) PARC Feed Mill PARC Mountain Agricultural Research Centre (MARC), Jaglot PARC National Agricultural Research Centre (NARC) PARC National Tea & High Value Crops Research Institute (NTHRI) PARC Research and Training Station, Bahauddin Zakariya University PARC Social Sciences Research Institute, Agriculture Complex Gojra PARC Southern-Zone Agricultural Research Centre (SARC) PARC-Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI), SARC PARC-Social Science Research Institute (SSRI), SARC, Tandojam PARC-Water and Agricultural Waste Management Institute (PARC-WAWMI), Tandojam PCRWR National Capacity Building Institute (NCBI), PCRWR Regional Office PCSIR Laboratories PCSIR Laboratories Complex PCSIR Laboratories Complex PCSIR Laboratories Complex PCSIRLaboratories PHRC Research Centre, Liaquat University of Medical and Health Sciences PHRC, Research Centre National Health Research Complex Shaikh Zayed Hospital PHRC, Specialized Research Centre for Child Health, National Institute of Child Health PMNH Zoological Sciences Division, PSF Poultry Production and Research Institute Poultry Research Institute Pulses Research Institute (PRI), AARI Rapid Soil Fertility Research Institute (RSFRI), AARI Regional Agricultural Research Institute (RARI) Rice Research Institute (RRI), AARI, Kala Shah Kaku Soil Salinity Research Institute (SSRI), AARI, Pindi Bhattian Sugar Crops Research Institute Sugarcane Research Institute (SRI), AARI SUPARCO Environmental Pollution Monitoring Lab Vegetable Research Institute (VRI), AARI Veterinary Research Institute Veterinary Research Institute Wheat Research Institute (WRI), AARI Zoological Survey Department Funding Source Type: Organization [National] University/Institution [National] Organization [International] Funding Source: Select Organization.... Flood Forecasting Division Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC) Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PARC National Agricultural Research Centre (NARC) Agricultural Economics Research Institute (AERI), NARC-PARC Animal Sciences Institute (ASI) , NARC-PARC Crop Sciences Institute (CSI) , NARC-PARC National Institute of Health (NIH) Pakistan Health Research Council (PHRC) National Institute of Electronics (NIE) Pakistan Council for Research in Water Resources (PCRWR) Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR) PCSIR Laboratories Complex PCSIR Laboratories Complex Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF) PSF Natural Science Linkage Program (NSLP) National Centre for Physics (NCP) National Engineering and Scientific Commission (NESCOM) Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) PAEC Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science & Technology (PINSTECH), Nilore PAEC National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE) National Radio Telecommunication Corporation (NRTC) Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA) Pakistan Horticulture Development and Export Company (PHDEC; formerly Pakistan Horticulture Development and Export Board, PHDEB) National Highway Authority (NHA) Central Power Purchasing Agency (CPPA) National Engineering Services Pakistan (NESPAK) Higher Education Commission (HEC) Ignite - National Technology Fund Pakistan Council for Science and Technology (PCST) Higher Education Department Planning and Development Board Punjab Information Technology Board (PITB) Punjab Economic Research Institute (PERI) Directorate of Science and Technology (DoST) Pakistan Academy of Science (PAS) Agriculture Department Government of Punjab Government of Pakistan (GoP), Islamabad, Pakistan Government of Sindh, Karachi, Pakistan Army Welfare Trust (AWT) Capital Development Authority (CDA), Islamabad, Pakistan Community Based Rehabilitation (CBR), Islamabad, Pakistan Directorate of Engineering Development, Air Headquarters, Islamabad, Pakistan Ministry of Science & Technology (MoST) Ministry of Education Ministry of Planning, Development & Reform Ministry of Women Development Organisation of Islamic Cooperation's (OIC) Standing Committee on Scientific & Technological Cooperation (COMSTECH), Islamabad, Pakistan Pakistan Centre for Philanthropy (PCP), Islamabad, Pakistan Pakistan Council of Appropriate Technology (PCAT), Islamabad, Pakistan Pakistan Microfinance Network (PMN), Islamabad, Pakistan Pakistan Navy Maritime Museum, Islamabad, Pakistan Pakistan Petroleum Limited (PPL), Karachi, Pakistan Pakistan Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA), Lahore, Pakistan Punjab Agriculture Research Board (PARB), Lahore, Pakistan Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd. (PTCL), Islamabad, Pakistan Society for Advertisement of Higher Education (SAHE), Islamabad, Pakistan State Bank of Pakistan, Islamabad, Pakistan Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI), Islamabad, Pakistan Water and Sanitation Agency (WASA) Pakistan Institute of Living and Learning (PILL), Karachi A.O. Hospital Abbas Institute of Medical Sciences Select Institute.... Abasyn University Air University Bahauddin Zakariya University Bahria University COMSATS Institute of Information Technology Foundation University Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology Gomal University Isra University, Hyderabad Lahore Leads University Lahore University of Management Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology NED University of Engineering & Technology National Textile University National University of Sciences & Technology Pakistan Institute of Development Economics Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology The University of Agriculture Peshawar University of Agriculture University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir University of Engineering & Technology University of Engineering & Technology University of Engineering & Technology University of Health Sciences University of Karachi University of Lahore University of Peshawar University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences University of the Punjab Virtual University of Pakistan Brains Institute Peshawar Abasyn University (Islamabad Campus) School of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science (SEECS) HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry Abbottabad International Medical College Leads Group of Colleges Center for Economic Research in Pakistan, Lahore, Pakistan University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) Select Organization.... United Nations Educational United States Agency for International Development United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund World Wide Fund for Nature Department for International Development Academy for Educational Development Adam Smith International British Council British High Commission British Petroleum Canada Fund for Local Initiative Canadian Institutes for Health Research Canadian International Development Agency Climate & Development Knowledge Network Centro Volta Chinese National Committee on Irrigation and Drainage Chinese National Key Foundation Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche or National Research Council Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of Pakistan Development Partnerships in Higher Education Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office Food and Agriculture Organization Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research German Academic Exchange Service Global Development Network Google Grand Challenges of Canada IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme International Foundation for Science Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations Institute of Development Studies Inter Academy Panel International Atomic Energy Agency International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology International Development Research Centre ( IDRC) International Food Policy Research Institute International Growth Centre International Labor Organization International Union for Conservation of Nature International Water Management Institute International Islamic Organization for Education, Science and Culture (ISESCO), Rabat, Morocco Japan Health Sciences Foundation Japan International Cooperation Agency United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS London School of Economics & Political Science Massachusetts Institute of Technology Midas Safety Mitsubishi Endowment Funds MTM International National Natural Science Foundation of China National Science Foundation Nokia Research Centre NRG Biofuels Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons P.E. Kempkes Foundation Private Angel Investor PUM Netherlands senior experts Relief International Research Triangle Institute Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation GE Healthcare South Asia Center for Policy Studies Synertech Associates The Asia Foundation The World Academy of Sciences Word Bank WaterAid United States Department of Agriculture International Centre for Agriculture Research in the Dry Areas University Research Grants Committee International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center University of Munich University of Sheffield University of the District of Columbia University of Malaysia University of Birmingham University of Berkeley University of Alberta Hospital United States Environmental Protection Agency United Nations World Food Programme United Nation Developmental program United Nation Women United Kingdom Medical Research Council Wellcome Trust Asian Development Bank Association of Management Development Institute in South Asia (AMDISA ) Australian Awards Australian Centre for International Agriculture Research Save the Children Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey International Life Sciences Institute Research Foundation Research Council of Norway Internal Centre for Theoretical Physics, , Italy Medical Research Council University of California McGill University Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council , Government of United Kingdom Office for Nuclear Regulation Islamic Development Bank King Saud University AK Composites United States Department of State French Institute of Petroleum Penssylvania State University Cambridge Energy Research Associates University of Vienna World Bank NRG Energy, Inc. Venus Technology Marvel Technology Group Ltd. Global Environment Facility New Mexico State University ( NM) Deutsche Gesellschaft fr Internationale ZUnited Statesmmenarbeit , Germany South Asian Network for Development and Environmental Economics Tetra Pak Ministry of Science, Research and Technology University of Malaya World Health Organization Embassy, Kingdom of the Netherlands International Livestock Research Institute South Asia Network of Economic Institute University of Queensland Food and Drug Administration Durham University Islamic Relief University Marine Biological Station Millport Nestle Foundation Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Development Ministry of Higher Education and Research Kalam Research & Media Toho University CAB International Institute of Biological Control PepsiCo Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Carleton University Civilian Research & Development Foundation Oxfam International Ministry of Energy, Science,Technology, Environment &Climate Change (MESTECC), Malaysia International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development , Lalitpur, Nepal Nizwa University Confiz Harokopio University of Athens International Water Management Institute Oxford Policy Management SAARC Energy Centre Swansea University University of Maryland University of Michigan Xavor Corporation Google International Institute for Management Development Adam Smith International University of California, San Diego United States Institute of Peace Sony Human Frontier Science Program Global Development Services International Nestle Showing Page 1 of 104 [ Total Records Found: 10305 ] S# Name PI Name Discipline 1 A High Performance Cloud Data Center Architecture Using Software-Defined Networks [+] Dr. Ihsan Ayyub Qazi Information Technology 2 A Privacy-Preserving Framework for Collaborative Business Process Composition [+] Dr. Basit Shafiq Information Technology 3 Aberrant DNA methylation as signature for breast cancer patients in Pakistani population [+] Dr. Muhammad Tariq Biological Sciences 4 Access to Justice for Poor and Vulnerable Groups through Support to Legal and Civil Society Organizations and Judiciary in Punjab, Pakistan [+] Dr. Muhammad Fareed Zaffar Social Sciences 5 Agri-business sector diagnostics [+] Dr. Syed Zahoor Hassan Agricultural Sciences 6 Amelioration of Salt Induced Adverse Effects in Sunflower (Helianthus Annus L) By Exogenous Appliation of Two Potential Plant Growth Regulators 5-Aminolevulinic Acid And Thiamine. [+] Dr. Muhammad AShraf Agricultural Sciences 7 Analysis of winning probabilities in Pakistan Prize Bonds [+] Dr. Arif Zaman Mathematics & Statistics 8 Association between high salt exposure and genetic integrity in salt mine workers [+] Zertashia Akram Biological Sciences 9 Attaining Maximum Solar Energy through Fine Grained Clustering in Home Area Networks [+] Dr. Naveed Arshad Information Technology 10 Boosting FDI Inflows to Pakistan: What Can Policy Makers Do? [+] Dr. Abid Aman Burki Social Sciences 11 breeding for impact of different temperatures on BT cruciferous crops and development of resistance to insecticides in plutella xylostella [+] Dr. Shafqat Saeed Agricultural Sciences 12 Building From Scratch: How Nanomaterials Can Help Resolve Membrane Scaffold Geometry and Function [+] Dr. Basit Yameen Health Sciences 13 Canal Drones: Precise 3D Profiling of Siltation in Waterways [+] Dr. Abubakr Muhammad Engineering Sciences 14 Cellular characterization of Aurora A kinase inhibitors for cancer therapeutics and identification of resistance mechanisms [+] Dr. Amir Faisal Biological Sciences 15 Computer Vision & Machine Learning Consultancy [+] Dr. Murtaza Taj Information Technology 16 Contribution of deal purpose legumes for energy practically and profitability of cereal base cropping system agronomic and economic variation. [+] Dr. Muhamad Asif Agricultural Sciences 17 Control of Bacterial Growth in a Biofilm [+] Dr. Adnan Khan Mathematics & Statistics 18 Conversion Kit for UPS to A Pseudo-Hybrid Converter with Scalable Architecture for Neighborhood Level Distribution Capability [+] Dr. Hassan Abbas Khan Engineering Sciences 19 Creating and Utilizing Comic Books to Bridge Knowledge Gaps in Child Health in Rural Okara, Punjab [+] Dr. Kashif Zaheer Malik Social Sciences 20 Design and Development of a Next-Generation Modelling and Simulation Platform for Cancer Systems Biology [+] : Dr. Safee Ullah Chaudhary Information Technology 21 Design and development of the mesh partitioning algorithm for a distributed numerical estimation of partial differential equation models of extra cellular environments using CUDA graphical processing unit arrays [+] Dr. Safee Ullah Chaudhary Biological Sciences 22 Design and Development of Wireless Sensor Networks in Industrial Monitoring and Control [+] Dr. Ijaz Haider Naqvi Engineering Sciences 23 Determinants of Internationalization Performance of SMEs: Institutional, Cultural, and Capability Factors [+] Dr. Kamran Ali Chata Social Sciences 24 Development of a medicinal product, capable of fighting against obesity and metabolic syndrome. [+] Dr. Darakshan Jabeen Haleem Chemical Sciences 25 Development of a Software Defined Radio Test-bed utilising GPS Signals for Navigation Applications [+] Dr. Muhammad Tahir Engineering Sciences 26 Development of an Affinity Support to Facilitate Isolation and Structural Characterization of Native Human Thymidylate Synthase for the Posttranslational Modifications and Their Role in Drug Resistance [+] Dr. Muhammad Saeed Biological Sciences 27 Development of an ultrasonic test bed for biomedical and detection applications [+] Dr. Farasat Munir Engineering Sciences 28 Development of Hepatitis C Viral and Human Immunodeficiency Viral Cellular Infectivity Assays to Identify New Potential Therapeutics [+] Dr. Syed Shahzad ul Hussan Health Sciences 29 Development of Sorghum-Sudan Grass Hybrids for Better Forage Yield and Quality under normal and Drought Stress [+] Dr. Ameer Bibi Agricultural Sciences 30 Development of Water Resources Management Information System (WRMIS) and Decision Support System (DSS) For Efficient Irrigation Water Management in Punjab [+] Dr. Abubakr Muhammad Engineering Sciences 31 Digital Street Theatre for Global Maternal and Child Health Education [+] Dr. Maryam Mustafa Information Technology 32 Digital Street Theatre for Global Maternal and Child Health Education [+] Dr. Maryam Mustafa Information Technology 33 Electric Trike Replacement of Donkey Carts [+] Mr. Nauman Ahmad Zaffar Engineering Sciences 34 Electrical Resistivity Survey for Groundwater Investigation to Locate Borehole Sites for Installation of 300 Tube wells of One cusec Capacity each in Nawab Shah, Sakrand, Mehrabpur Extending upto more area [+] Dr. Saeed Ahmed Soomro Agricultural Sciences 35 Embedded 6 DOF Visual-Inertial Odometry for Aerial and Ground Robots [+] Dr. Ahmad Kamal Nasir Information Technology 36 Enabling EEG Signal Technology for Home Health Care [+] Dr. Nadeem Ahmad Khan Engineering Sciences 37 Establishment of Centre for Islamic Finance - Financial Innovation Challenge Fund (FICF) [+] Dr. Saad Azmat Social Sciences 38 Evaluation of Battery Discharge Profile for In-Service Mobile Phones [+] Dr. Hassan Abbas Khan Engineering Sciences 39 Evaluation of Mungbean Cultivars and Impact of Seed Inoculation With rhizobium in Pothwar Plateau. [+] Dr. Muhammad Rasheed Agricultural Sciences 40 Evaluation of Prequalification of for Government of the Punjab (2017-18) [+] Dr. Muhammad Shakeel Sadiq Jajja Social Sciences 41 Experimental Validation of Smart Grid Technologies by Building a Test Bed at LUMS [+] Dr Naveed Hassan Engineering Sciences 42 Exploiting controlled atmosphere technology potential for extended storage and shipping of fresh produce to international markets [+] Dr. Aman Ullah Malik Agricultural Sciences 43 Extending the Cyberphysical Systems R & D Paradigm using Energy Transference [+] Dr. Muhammad Hamad Alizai Information Technology 44 Fiber-Optic Applications using Agile and Tunable Photonics [+] Dr. Syed Azer Reza Engineering Sciences 45 Fine Tuning of an In-house Developed Atomic Force Microscope [+] Dr. Muhammad Sabieh Anwar Physics 46 Genome-Wide Identification of Salt Tolerant Genes in Using High-Throughput Sequencing Data [+] : Dr. Aziz Mithani Biological Sciences 47 Genome-Wide Identification of Salt Tolerant Genes in Using High-Throughput Sequencing Data [+] : Dr. Aziz Mithani Biological Sciences 48 Green Catalytic Conversion of Waste Paper to Fuels and Chemicals [+] Dr. Muhammad Zaheer Environmental Sciences 49 GreenSMS: A Low-cost and Non-invasive System to Reduce Load Shedding [+] Dr. Naveed Arshad Information Technology 50 High Power Density Inverter for intermittent grid and electrical drives with enhanced efficiency and low switch stresses. [+] Mr. Nauman Ahmad Zaffar Engineering Sciences 51 Honey based Hybrid Dental Implants with Enhanced Antibacterial and Cell-Proliferation Properties [+] Dr. Hina Zahid Chemical Sciences 52 Identifying Nasal Epithelial MicroRNA Regulators of the Gene-expression Response to Smoking Cessation [+] Dr. Syeda Kahkeshan Hijazi Biological Sciences 53 Identifying the role of the RIN4- NOI domains in plant disease resistance and developmental regulation [+] Dr. Ahmed Jawaad Afzal Biological Sciences 54 Improve Efficiency, reliability and trenchancy of the school education department by automating HR processes [+] Dr. Muhammad Fareed Zaffar Social Sciences 55 Improving Accountability in Pakistan's Schools [+] Dr. Saher Asad Any other 56 Improving Web Performance over Low-end Smartphone in the Developing World [+] Dr. Zafar Ayyub Qazi Information Technology 57 Indoor Positioning System Using Visible Led Lights [+] Dr. Muhammad Adeel Ahmed Pasha Engineering Sciences 58 Information Sharing and Integration and Framework for Emergency Management and Response [+] Dr. Basit Shafiq Information Technology 59 Information Sharing and Integration and Framework for Emergency Management and Response [+] Dr. Basit Shafiq Information Technology 60 Information Sharing and Integration and Framework for Emergency Management and Response [+] Dr. Basit Shafiq Information Technology 61 INTEGRA: Capacity Building in Higher Education [+] Dr. Asim Karim Social Sciences 62 Integrated Management of Brinjal Shoot & Fruit Borer, Leucinades Orbonalis (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae) [+] Dr. Asim Gulzar Biological Sciences 63 Investigation of Pathogen Drived Resistance Against Begonmoviruses. [+] Dr. Muhammad Saleem Biological Sciences 64 Iridium Catalyzed Borylation using Bis[(+)-pinanediolato]diboron: Synthesis of Chiral Arylboronic Esters by CH Borylation [+] Dr. Ghayoor Abbas Chotana Biological Sciences 65 Isolation & Molecular Characterization of Prevalent Infectious Bursal Disease Virus Serotypes for Vaccine Development [+] Dr. Asma Ashraf Biological Sciences 66 Joint Congestion Control and Load Balancing in Cloud Data Centers Using SON [+] : Dr. Ihsan Ayyub Qazi Information Technology 67 LUMSPROT 2.0 A High Performance MATLAB Toolbox for Searching Protein Mass Spectra using NVIDIAs Graphical Processing Unit Arrays [+] Dr. Safee Ullah Chaudhary Biological Sciences 68 Measurement of Noise Levels in LT Distribution Network of LESCO to Assess Viability of Narrowband Over Power Line Communication in 95 Khz 500 Khz Bands [+] Mr. Nauman Ahmad Zaffar Engineering Sciences 69 MM- wave integration and embedded antennas in System-in-Package Work Package 2 [+] Dr. Wasif Tanveer Khan Engineering Sciences 70 Molecular Characterisation of Mixed Lineage Leukemia 5 (MLL5) Gene in Drosophila [+] Dr. Muhammad Tariq Health Sciences 71 Molecular Characterization of Banana for Host Resistance Against Banana Bunchy Top Disease (BBTD) In Sindh Province. [+] Mr. Ikram ul Haq, Biological Sciences 72 Observing Magnetization Dynamics of Single Molecule Magnets Using Polarized Light [+] Dr. Muhammad Sabieh Anwar Physics 73 Optimal Control of the Transmission Dynamics of the Hepatitis C with Quarantine [+] Dr. Imran Naeem Mathematics & Statistics 74 Optimized solar PV energy integration to Weak-Grids for Developing Countries [+] Dr. Hassan Abbas Khan Engineering Sciences 75 Out-of School Children (OOSC) Study 2014-2015 [+] Dr. Abid Aman Burki Social Sciences 76 Persuasion by Islamic Banks [+] : Dr. Saad Azmat Social Sciences 77 Power Flow Control for Optimized Solar PV Systems [+] Dr. Hassan Abbas Khan Engineering Sciences 78 Pre-surgical Mapping Using Task-Driven And Resting State FMRI: a Collaborative Project with Aga Khan University Hospital [+] Dr. Waqas Majeed Engineering Sciences 79 Projectile Tracking using Acoustic Localisation [+] Dr. Momin Ayub Uppa Engineering Sciences 80 Punjab Economic Report: 2016 - The Punjab's Socio-economic Profile [+] Mr. Mohammad Usman Khan Any other 81 Rapid & Convenient Synthesis of Biologically Active Aryl/Heteroaryl Indole Alkaloids [+] : Dr. Ghayoor Abbas Chotana Chemical Sciences 82 Rapid Assessment/Research for Identification of Contributing Factors Related To Alarmingly Rates in Certain Districts of Punjab [+] Dr. Abid Aman Burki Social Sciences 83 Re-Development of Software (Prosecution Case Flow Management System) For Public Criminal Prosecution Services (PCPS) In Punjab [+] Dr. Muhammad Fareed Zaffar Information Technology 84 Reverse Genetics Approach to Link Epigenetic Cell Memory and Cell Signaling [+] Dr. Muhammad Tariq Biological Sciences 85 Role of Caspases in the Differentiation of Trophoblast Stem Cells into Polyploid Giant Cells [+] Dr. Amir Faisal Biological Sciences 86 Self-Cleaning Water Filter Based on Polymer Nanofibers for Bacterial and Viruses Removal from Drinking Water [+] Dr. Salman Noshear Arshad Environmental Sciences 87 Simulation Modeling, Analysis and Forecasting of Electricity generation and consumption in Pakistan using System Dynamics approach [+] Dr. Naveed Arshad Information Technology 88 Slices of Self Identity and Context [+] Dr. Husnain Fateh Ahmed Social Sciences 89 SOP Formation and Research Agendas for USAID [+] Dr. Khawaja Zain ul Abdin Any other 90 Statistan [+] Dr. Muhammad Fareed Zaffar Information Technology 91 Sustaibable Management of Sitophlus Oryzae (L.) (Coleoptera Curculionidae) on Stored Rice in Punjab [+] Dr Waqas Wakil Agricultural Sciences 92 Synthesis of tethered biaryls and their evaluation to selectively kill the cancer [+] Dr. Rahman Shah Zaib Saleem Biological Sciences 93 Technical Studies on Climate Change Adaptation through use of Water and Climate Informatics [+] Dr. Abubakr Muhammad Environmental Sciences 94 Towards Energy Efficient Commercial Buildings through Consumer Behavior Considerations Using Internet of Things (Iot) and Machine-To-Machine (M2M) Platforms [+] Dr. Naveed Ul Hassan Engineering Sciences 95 Towards Predictable and Resilient Multi-Tenant Cloud Datacenters [+] Dr. Ihsan Ayyub Qazi Information Technology 96 Towards Predictable and Resilient Multi-Tenant Cloud Datacentres [+] : Dr. Ihsan Ayyub Qazi Information Technology 97 Tracing Women in the Informal Sector of Pakistan-Labour Market Dynamics [+] Dr. Misbah Tanveer Chaudhry Social Sciences 98 Training Farmers in Processing and Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables to Curtail Post Harvest Losses. [+] Dr. Saeed Akhtar Agricultural Sciences 99 Transgenic Approaches for the Development of Drought and Salt Tolerance in Wheat [+] Dr. Aftab Bashir Agricultural Sciences 100 Trust and Credibility Study [+] Dr. Muhammad Abdur Rahman Malik Agricultural Sciences 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ... Last Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad Project Details Content goes here... Close
PASTIC | Science & Technology (S&T) Data Forms - Registration & Submission Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Note: Some of the forms below will be available online in the near future. If the form is not online, you can download the respective form, fill it, and submit it to the given email address. In case of any issues with the forms, contact us at: webmaster@pastic.gov.pk and mti@pastic.gov.pk . Please choose a link to proceed for registration: Become a member Register as a member of PASTIC Network to receive updates on scientific technologies, workshops, seminars, trainings, and other activities. Click Here to Proceed to the Form Apply for Registration as a Scientist Apply for registration in PASTIC's Scientists directory. Upon approval, your information will be listed on the PASTIC website. Click Here to Proceed to the Form Apply for a Commercial Product Registration Register your product in PASTIC's Commercializable Products Directory. Click Here to Proceed to the Form Proceedings/Conferences Data Form Submit your conference details to be included in PASTIC's Proceedings/Conferences Database. Click Here to Proceed to the Form Industry-Academia Linkage Data Form Submit your Industry-Academia linkage details for inclusion in PASTIC's Industry-Academia Linkages Database. Click Here to Download the Form Send the filled form to: shah_aftab@yahoo.com R&D Projects Data Form Submit your R&D project details for inclusion in PASTIC's R&D Projects Database. Click Here to Download the Form Send the filled form to: shah_aftab@yahoo.com R&D Equipment Data Form Submit details of your R&D equipment to be listed in PASTIC's R&D Equipment Database. Click Here to Proceed to the Form Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Reprographic Services - Printing & Publishing Solutions Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Reprographic Services PASTIC Reprographic Section has facilities for composing, designing, plate making, offset printing, binding etc. for Printing of books, Pamphlets, Brochures, Journals, Newsletters, Cards, Folders etc. These facilities are not only used for printing of PASTIC publications but are also extended to all other S&T and R&D Organizations. The Unit is equipped with: Offset Printing Machines Printing Down Frame Cutting Machine Stitching Machine Creasing Machine Dark Room Camera Latest Computers/Printers Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Request Scholarly Literature & Patent Documents Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form Request Scholarly Literature Scientific literature refers to published research, including scholarly articles and academic papers. Click the link above to request specific documents. Request Patent Documents A patent grants exclusive rights to an invention for up to 20 years. To request patent abstracts or related documents, click the link above. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Scientists Directory - Find Experts in Science & Technology Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES National Scientists Directory Create Your Scientist Profile In accordance with the National Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) Policy 2022, an online portal for the National Scientists Directory (NSD) has been introduced by PASTIC to facilitate the registration of scientists throughout Pakistan. The data from the NSD will play a crucial role in the strategic planning and advancement of human resources in the science and technology (S&T) sector, promoting research-driven results. Additionally, this platform will unlock a wide range of opportunities for scientists, including: Benefits of Registration: Increased visibility & networking opportunities Professional recognition & access to funding Research collaborations & career development Recruitment for academic & industry positions Documentation of accomplishments & public impact Recognition in the global scientific community Scientist ranking & registration certificate SN# Name Discipline Affiliation Qualification 1 Dr. Aadil Raza Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2 Dr. Aalia Batool Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3 Dr. Aaliya Minhaz Chemical Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 4 Dr. Aamer Abbas Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 5 Dr. Aamer Ali Shah Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 6 Dr. Aamer Hanif Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 7 Dr. Aamer Nadeem Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 8 Dr. Aamer Raza Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 9 Dr. Aamer Shahzad Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 10 Dr. Aamir Shahzad Physics Government College University PhD 11 Dr. Aamir Alaud Din Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 12 Dr. Aamir Ali Biological Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 13 Dr. Aamir Ali Earth Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 14 Dr. Aamir Ali Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 15 Dr. Aamir Amanat Ali Khan Environmental Sciences University of Lahore PhD 16 Dr. Aamir Amanat Ali Khan Environmental Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 17 Dr. Aamir Habib Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 18 Dr. Aamir Hanif Engineering Sciences University of Wah PhD 19 Dr. Aamir Hussain Engineering Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 20 Dr. Aamir Iqbal Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 21 Dr. Aamir Iqbal Multidisciplinary Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 22 Dr. Aamir Mubashar Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 23 Dr. Aamir Nadeem Social Sciences City University of Science and Information Technology PhD 24 Dr. Aamir Nawaz Engineering Sciences Gomal University PhD 25 Dr. Aamir Nawaz Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 26 Dr. Aamir Qamar Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 27 Dr. Aamir Rashid Multidisciplinary Iqra University (Malir Campus) PhD 28 Dr. Aamir Rashid Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 29 Dr. Aamir Saleem Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 30 Dr. Aamir Sanaullah Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 31 Dr. Aamir Shahzad Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 32 Dr. Aamir Shakoor Engineering Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 33 Dr. Aamir Siddiqui Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 34 Dr. Aamir Wali Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 35 Dr. Aamna Balouch Chemical Sciences University of Sindh PhD 36 Dr. Aansa Rukya Saleem Environmental Sciences Bahria University PhD 37 Dr. Aaqif Afzaal Abbasi Engineering Sciences Foundation University PhD 38 Dr. Aashir Waleed Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 39 Dr. Aasim Ali Abro Engineering Sciences Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University of Technology & Skill Development PhD 40 Dr. Aasim Munir Dad Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 41 Dr. Aatif Amin Biological Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 42 Dr. Abad Khan Biological Sciences University of Swabi PhD 43 Dr. Abaid Ur Rehman Virk Mathematics & Statistics University of Sialkot PhD 44 Dr. Abbas Ali Naseem Earth Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 45 Mr. Abbas Aziz Chemical Sciences University of Sindh MPhil 46 Dr. Abbas Khan Biological Sciences University of Home Economics PhD 47 Dr. Abbas Khan Chemical Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 48 Dr. Abbas Saleem Khan Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 49 Dr. Abd Ur Rehman Khalid Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 50 Dr. Abdul Ghaffar Physics Government College University PhD 51 Dr. Abdul Hameed Biological Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 52 Dr. Abdul Qudoos Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 53 Dr. Abdul Raziq Mathematics & Statistics University of Balochistan PhD 54 Dr. Abdul Rehman Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 55 Dr. Abdul Aleem Jamali Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 56 Dr. Abdul Attayyab Khan Engineering Sciences Bahria University PhD 57 Dr. Abdul Azeez Khan Biological Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 58 Dr. Abdul Aziz Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 59 Dr. Abdul Aziz Ali Muhammad Soomro Biological Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 60 Dr. Abdul Baseer Biological Sciences Abasyn University PhD 61 Dr. Abdul Baseer Qazi Engineering Sciences Bahria University PhD 62 Dr. Abdul Basit Engineering Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 63 Dr. Abdul Basit Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 64 Dr. Abdul Basit Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 65 Abdul Basit Siddiqui 66 Dr. Abdul Faheem Khan Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 67 Dr. Abdul Fattah Soomro Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 68 Abdul Ghaffar 69 Dr. Abdul Ghaffar Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 70 Dr. Abdul Ghaffar Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 71 Prof. Abdul Ghaffar Daudpoto Biological Sciences University of Art and Culture MPhil 72 Dr. Abdul Ghaffar Memon Environmental Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 73 Dr. Abdul Ghafoor Engineering Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 74 Dr. Abdul Ghafoor Kazi Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 75 Dr. Abdul Ghafoor Memon Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 76 Dr. Abdul Ghani Abro Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 77 Dr. Abdul Ghani Pathan Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 78 Dr. Abdul Ghuffar Physics Riphah International University PhD 79 Dr. Abdul Hafeez Information Technology Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 80 Dr. Abdul Hafeez Biological Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 81 Dr. Abdul Hafeez Information Technology Bahria University PhD 82 Dr. Abdul Hafeez Kandhro Biological Sciences PhD 83 Dr. Abdul Hai Madni Social Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 84 Dr. Abdul Hakeem Chemical Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 85 Dr. Abdul Hakeem Memon Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 86 Dr. Abdul Hakim Shah Physics Khushal Khan Khattak University PhD 87 Dr. Abdul Haleem Khan Chemical Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 88 Dr. Abdul Haleem Shah Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 89 Dr. Abdul Hameed Chemical Sciences University of Sahiwal PhD 90 Dr. Abdul Hameed Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 91 Dr. Abdul Hameed Social Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 92 Dr. Abdul Hameed Panhwar Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 93 Dr. Abdul Hameed Pitafi Information Technology Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 94 Dr. Abdul Hamid Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 95 Dr. Abdul Hanan Sheikh Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Business Management PhD 96 Dr. Abdul Haque Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 97 Dr. Abdul Haque Social Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 98 Dr. Abdul Haseeb Social Sciences University of Haripur PhD 99 Mr. Abdul Haseeb Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology Masters 100 Dr. Abdul Haseeb Malik Engineering Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 101 Dr. Abdul Hayee Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 102 Dr. Abdul Jabbar Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 103 Dr. Abdul Jabbar Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 104 Abdul Jabbar 105 Dr. Abdul Jabbar Khan Engineering Sciences Rawalpindi Women University PhD 106 Dr. Abdul Jalil Social Sciences Pakistan Institute of Development Economics PhD 107 Dr. Abdul Jalil Physics Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 108 Dr. Abdul Jawad Physics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 109 Dr. Abdul Khaliq Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 110 Dr. Abdul Khaliq Mathematics & Statistics Riphah International University PhD 111 Dr. Abdul Khaliq Engineering Sciences Sir Syed (CASE) Institute of Technology PhD 112 Dr. Abdul Khaliq Jan Chemical Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 113 Dr. Abdul Khalique Junejo Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 114 Dr. Abdul Latif Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 115 Dr. Abdul Majeed Physics Islamia University PhD 116 Dr. Abdul Majeed Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 117 Dr. Abdul Majeed Akhtar Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 118 Dr. Abdul Majeed Akhtar Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 119 Dr. Abdul Majeed Khan Chemical Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 120 Dr. Abdul Majeed Nadeem Social Sciences Government College University PhD 121 Dr. Abdul Majid Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 122 Dr. Abdul Majid Biological Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 123 Dr. Abdul Majid Physics University of Gujrat (GT RoadCampus Gujrat) PhD 124 Dr. Abdul Majid Social Sciences University of Haripur PhD 125 Dr. Abdul Majid Khan Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 126 Dr. Abdul Malik Biological Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 127 Dr. Abdul Malik Biological Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 128 Dr. Abdul Malik Abbasi Social Sciences Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 129 Dr. Abdul Manaf Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 130 Dr. Abdul Manan Shaikh Biological Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 131 Dr. Abdul Manan Tauqeer Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 132 Mr. Abdul Mannan Majeed Physics University of Education (Multan Campus) PhD 133 Dr. Abdul Mateen Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 134 Dr. Abdul Matin Biological Sciences University of Baltistan PhD 135 Dr. Abdul Momin Rizwan Ahmad Health Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 136 Dr. Abdul Mubeen Lodhi Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 137 Dr. Abdul Munim Farooq Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 138 Dr. Abdul Nabi Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 139 Dr. Abdul Nasir Engineering Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 140 Dr. Abdul Nasir Khalid Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 141 Dr. Abdul Nasir Khan Information Technology COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 142 Dr. Abdul Nasir Laghari Environmental Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 143 Dr. Abdul Qadeer Dayo Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 144 Dr. Abdul Qadir Mushtaq Social Sciences Government College University PhD 145 Dr. Abdul Qayoom Rajput Agricultural Sciences University of Karachi PhD 146 Dr. Abdul Qayyum Social Sciences University of Jhang PhD 147 Dr. Abdul Qayyum Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 148 Dr. Abdul Qayyum Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 149 Dr. Abdul Qayyum Khan Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 150 Dr. Abdul Qayyum Khan Social Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 151 Dr. Abdul Qayyum Rao Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 152 Dr. Abdul Rab Social Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 153 Dr. Abdul Rasheed Social Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 154 Dr. Abdul Rauf Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 155 Dr. Abdul Rauf Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 156 Dr. Abdul Rauf Bhatti Engineering Sciences Government College University PhD 157 Dr. Abdul Rauf Kashif Social Sciences Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 158 Dr. Abdul Rauf Khaskheli Chemical Sciences Shaheed Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto Medical University PhD 159 Dr. Abdul Razak Mahar Agricultural Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 160 Dr. Abdul Razaq Mathematics & Statistics University of Education (Bank Road Campus Lahore) PhD 161 Dr. Abdul Razaq Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 162 Dr. Abdul Razaque Channa Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 163 Dr. Abdul Razaque Chhachhar Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 164 Dr. Abdul Raziq Social Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 165 Dr. Abdul Razzaq Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 166 Dr. Abdul Razzaq Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 167 Dr. Abdul Razzaq Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 168 Dr. Abdul Razzaq Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 169 Dr. Abdul Razzaq Farooqi Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 170 Dr. Abdul Razzaq Khan Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 171 Dr. Abdul Razzaque Information Technology National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 172 Dr. Abdul Rehman Chemical Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 173 Dr. Abdul Rehman Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 174 Dr. Abdul Rehman Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 175 Dr. Abdul Rehman Kashif Mathematics & Statistics Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 176 Dr. Abdul Rehman Khan Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 177 Dr. Abdul Rehman Khan Niazi Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 178 Dr. Abdul Rehman Phull Biological Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 179 Dr. Abdul Rehman Yasin Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 180 Dr. Abdul Rehman Yasin Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 181 Dr. Abdul Sadiq Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 182 Dr. Abdul Sajid Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 183 Dr. Abdul Salam Buller Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 184 Dr. Abdul Samad Dahri Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 185 Dr. Abdul Samad Shaikh Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 186 Abdul Sami 187 Dr. Abdul Sami Qureshi Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 188 Dr. Abdul Sattar Information Technology Lahore Garrison University PhD 189 Dr. Abdul Sattar Physics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 190 Dr. Abdul Sattar Jatoi Chemical Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 191 Dr. Abdul Sattar Larik Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 192 Dr. Abdul Sattar Nizami Engineering Sciences Government College University PhD 193 Dr. Abdul Sattar Qureshi Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 194 Dr. Abdul Shahid Information Technology Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 195 Dr. Abdul Shakoor Mathematics & Statistics Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 196 Dr. Abdul Shakoor Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 197 Dr. Abdul Shakoor Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 198 Dr. Abdul Shakoor Mastoi Earth Sciences University of Sindh PhD 199 Dr. Abdul Subhan Kazi Social Sciences Isra University, Hyderabad PhD 200 Dr. Abdul Wadood Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 201 Dr. Abdul Wadood Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 202 Dr. Abdul Wahab Chemical Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 203 Dr. Abdul Wahab Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 204 Dr. Abdul Wahab Jatoi Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 205 Dr. Abdul Waheed Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 206 Dr. Abdul Waheed Information Technology Northern University PhD 207 Dr. Abdul Waheed Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 208 Dr. Abdul Waheed Anwar Physics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 209 Dr. Abdul Waheed Badar Engineering Sciences HITEC University PhD 210 Prof. Abdul Waheed Bhutto Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 211 Mr. Abdul Waheed Jamali Social Sciences Directorate General Monitoring & Evaluation (DGM&E), Education & Literacy Department MPhil 212 Dr. Abdul Waheed Mughal Social Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 213 Dr. Abdul Waheed Siyal Social Sciences ILMA University PhD 214 Dr. Abdul Wahid Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 215 Abdul Wahid 216 Dr. Abdul Wahid Khan Information Technology University of Science & Technology PhD 217 Dr. Abdul Wajid Khan Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 218 Prof. Abdul Wakeel Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 219 Dr. Abdul Wali Biological Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 220 Dr. Abdul Zahid Khan Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 221 Dr. Abdullah Social Sciences Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology PhD 222 Dr. Abdullah Bin Omar Social Sciences National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 223 Dr. Abdullah Hammad Social Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 224 Dr. Abdullah Ijaz Hussain Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 225 Dr. Abdullah Khan Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 226 Dr. Abdullah Maitlo Information Technology Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 227 Dr. Abdullah Shah Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 228 Dr. Abdullah Waqas Engineering Sciences National University of Technology (NUTECH) PhD 229 Dr. Abdullah Yar Physics Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 230 Dr. Abdullah Yasar Environmental Sciences Government College University PhD 231 Dr. Abdur Rasheed Physics Government College University PhD 232 Dr. Abdur Raheem Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 233 Dr. Abdur Rahim Chemical Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 234 Dr. Abdur Rahman Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 235 Dr. Abdur Rahman Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 236 Dr. Abdur Rahman Ansari Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 237 Dr. Abdur Rasheed Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 238 Dr. Abdur Rashid Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 239 Dr. Abdur Rauf Chemical Sciences University of Swabi PhD 240 Dr. Abdur Rauf Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 241 Dr. Abdur Rehim Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 242 Dr. Abdur Rehman Mathematics & Statistics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 243 Dr. Abdur Rehman Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 244 Dr. Abdur Rehman Mazhar Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 245 Dr. Abdurrahman Javid Shaikh Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 246 Dr. Abdus Samie Social Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 247 Dr. Abedullah Social Sciences Pakistan Institute of Development Economics PhD 248 Dr. Abeeda Qureshi Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 249 Dr. Abher Rasheed Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 250 Dr. Abi Waqas Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 251 Dr. Abid Ullah Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 252 Dr. Abid Ali Earth Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 253 Prof. Abid Ali Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 254 Dr. Abid Ali Khan Biological Sciences University of Lakki Marwat PhD 255 Dr. Abid Ali Shah Bukhari Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 256 Dr. Abid Aslam Maan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 257 Dr. Abid Farid Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 258 Dr. Abid Ghafoor Chaudhry Social Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 259 Dr. Abid Hussain Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 260 Dr. Abid Hussain Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 261 Dr. Abid Hussain Physics Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 262 Dr. Abid Hussain Agricultural Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 263 Dr. Abid Hussain Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 264 Mr. Abid Hussain Social Sciences Higher, Technical Education & Research & School Education and Literacy Department MPhil 265 Dr. Abid Hussanan Mathematics & Statistics University of Education PhD 266 Dr. Abid Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 267 Dr. Abid Latif Engineering Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 268 Dr. Abid Mahboob Alam Mathematics & Statistics University of Education PhD 269 Dr. Abid Mahmood Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 270 Dr. Abid Mehmood Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 271 Dr. Abid Muhammad Khan Engineering Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 272 Dr. Abid Rashid Health Sciences Government College University PhD 273 Dr. Abid Riaz Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 274 Dr. Abid Sarwar Engineering Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 275 Ms. Abida Information Technology Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commission (SUPARCO) Masters 276 Dr. Abida Akram Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 277 Dr. Abida Noureen Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 278 Dr. Abida Aziz Biological Sciences The Women University PhD 279 Dr. Abida Bano Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 280 Dr. Abida Ellahi Social Sciences Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 281 Dr. Abida Kausar Chemical Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 282 Dr. Abida Kausar Biological Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 283 Dr. Abida Parveen Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 284 Prof. Abida Raza Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 285 Dr. Abida Sharif Social Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 286 Dr. Abida Yasmeen Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 287 Dr. Abidah Parveen Chemical Sciences Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 288 Dr. Abraiz Khattak Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 289 Dr. Abrar Ahmed Health Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 290 Dr. Abrar Ahmed Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 291 Mr. Abrar Ali khan Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 292 Mr. Abrar Hussain Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 293 Dr. Abrar Hussain Qureshi Social Sciences University of Sahiwal PhD 294 Dr. Abrar Niaz Earth Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 295 Dr. Abrar Ul Haq Khan Baluch Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 296 Dr. Abrar Ullah Social Sciences University of Swabi PhD 297 Dr. Abu Bakar Muhammad Raza Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 298 Dr. Abu Bakar Siddique Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 299 Dr. Abu Baker Siddique Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 300 Dr. Abu Ul Hassan Faiz Biological Sciences Women University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 301 Dr. Abubakar Nazeer Choudhry Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 302 Dr. Abubakr Saeed Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 303 Dr. Abuzar Ghaffari Mathematics & Statistics University of Education (Attock Campus) PhD 304 Dr. Adam Khan Biological Sciences University of Buner PhD 305 Dr. Adam Saud Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 306 Dr. Adam Zaman Chaudhry Physics Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 307 Dr. Adeeb Shehzad Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 308 Dr. Adeel Mehmood Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 309 Dr. Adeel Nasir Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 310 Dr. Adeel Akhtar Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 311 Dr. Adeel Anjum Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 312 Dr. Adeel Ansari Information Technology Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 313 Dr. Adeel Javed Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 314 Dr. Adeel Masood Butt Health Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 315 Dr. Adeel Muzaffar Syed Information Technology Bahria University PhD 316 Dr. Adeel Rafiq Engineering Sciences HITEC University PhD 317 Dr. Adeel Rahim Social Sciences University of FATA PhD 318 Adeel Tahir 319 Dr. Adeel Tariq Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 320 Dr. Adeel Waqas Ahmad Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 321 Dr. Adeel Zafar Information Technology Riphah International University PhD 322 Ms. Adeela Anwar Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 323 Ms. Adeela Anwar Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 324 Dr. Adeela Rehman Social Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 325 Dr. Adeela Saeed Chemical Sciences The Women University PhD 326 Dr. Adil Farooq Lodhi Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 327 Dr. Adil Hussain Agricultural Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 328 Dr. Adil Jhangeer Mathematics & Statistics Namal Institute PhD 329 Mr. Adil Khan Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology Masters 330 Dr. Adil Khan Biological Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 331 Dr. Adil Masood Siddiqui Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 332 Dr. Adil Sultan Muhammad Social Sciences Air University PhD 333 Dr. Adil Zulfiqar Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 334 Dr. Adiqa Kiani Social Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology is listed as Federal Urdu University of Arts PhD 335 Dr. Adnan Information Technology Institute of Management Sciences PhD 336 Dr. Adnan Aslam Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 337 Dr. Adnan Abid Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 338 Dr. Adnan Adil Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 339 Dr. Adnan Adnan Chemical Sciences University of Swat PhD 340 Dr. Adnan Ahamad Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 341 Dr. Adnan Ahmad Agricultural Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 342 Dr. Adnan Ahmad Ansari Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 343 Dr. Adnan Ahmad Tahir Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 344 Dr. Adnan Ahmed Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 345 Dr. Adnan Ahmed Sheikh Social Sciences Air University PhD 346 Dr. Adnan Akhter Agricultural Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 347 Dr. Adnan Ali Physics Government College University PhD 348 Dr. Adnan Amin Health Sciences Gomal University PhD 349 Dr. Adnan Amjad Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 350 Dr. Adnan Ashraf Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 351 Dr. Adnan Ashraf Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 352 Dr. Adnan Aslam Mathematics & Statistics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 353 Dr. Adnan Butt Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 354 Dr. Adnan Daud Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 355 Dr. Adnan Daud Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 356 Dr. Adnan Fazil Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 357 Dr. Adnan Fida Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 358 Dr. Adnan Haider Chemical Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 359 Dr. Adnan Hamid Chemical Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 360 Dr. Adnan Hushmat Social Sciences Bahria University (Lahore Campus) PhD 361 Dr. Adnan Idris Information Technology University of the Poonch PhD 362 Dr. Adnan Iftikhar Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 363 Dr. Adnan Iqbal Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 364 Dr. Adnan Iqbal Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 365 Dr. Adnan Jahangir Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 366 Dr. Adnan Khalid Information Technology Government College University PhD 367 Dr. Adnan Khan Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 368 Dr. Adnan Khan Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 369 Dr. Adnan Khan Niazi Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 370 Dr. Adnan Malik Mathematics & Statistics University of Management & Technology PhD 371 Dr. Adnan Maqsood Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 372 Dr. Adnan Muhammad Shah Social Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 373 Dr. Adnan Noor Mian Information Technology Information Technology University of the Punjab PhD 374 Dr. Adnan Noor Shah Agricultural Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 375 Dr. Adnan Pitafi Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 376 Dr. Adnan Qadir Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 377 Dr. Adnan Rashid Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 378 Dr. Adnan Riaz Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 379 Dr. Adnan Saeed Physics Government College for Women University PhD 380 Dr. Adnan Shoaib Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 381 Dr. Adnan Sohail Information Technology Iqra University PhD 382 Dr. Adnan Younis Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 383 Dr. Adnan Younis Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 384 Dr. Adnan Yousaf Engineering Sciences The Superior College PhD 385 Dr. Adnan Zafar Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 386 Dr. Aeysha Sultan Chemical Sciences University of Education PhD 387 Dr. Afaf Manzoor Social Sciences University of Education PhD 388 Dr. Afaque Manzoor Soomro Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 389 Dr. Affaq Qamar Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 390 Dr. Affhan Shoaib Biological Sciences Salim Habib University (Former Barret Hodgson University) PhD 391 Dr. Affifa Tajammal Chemical Sciences Lahore Garrison University PhD 392 Dr. AFIA KHALID Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 393 Dr. AFIA KHALID Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 394 Dr. Afia Muhammad Akram Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 395 Dr. Afrasiab Khan Tareen Biological Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 396 Dr. Afrose Liaquat Biological Sciences Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University PhD 397 Dr. Afsah Qazi Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 398 Dr. Afsar Khan Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 399 Dr. Afshan Kaleem Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 400 Dr. Afshan Kanwal Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) PhD 401 Dr. Afshan Naseem Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 402 Dr. Afshan Rahman Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 403 Dr. Afshan Sadiq Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 404 Dr. Afshan Tabassum Mathematics & Statistics National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 405 Dr. Afsheen Abrar Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 406 Dr. Afsheen Aman Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 407 Dr. Afsheen Arif Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 408 Dr. Afsheen Fatima Social Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 409 AFSHEEN TARIQ RAJA 410 Dr. Aftab Afzal Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 411 Dr. Aftab Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 412 Dr. Aftab Ahmad Anjum Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 413 Dr. Aftab Ahmad Khan Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 414 Dr. Aftab Ahmed Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 415 Dr. Aftab Ahmed Chandio Information Technology University of Sindh PhD 416 Dr. Aftab Ahmed Shaikh Information Technology Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 417 Dr. Aftab Alam Mathematics & Statistics The Islamia College PhD 418 Dr. Aftab Alam Information Technology University of Malakand PhD 419 Dr. Aftab Alam Social Sciences Abasyn University PhD 420 Dr. Aftab Ali Shah Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 421 Dr. Aftab Azeem Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 422 Dr. Aftab Haider Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 423 Dr. Aftab Hameed Memon Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 424 Dr. Aftab Hussain Mathematics & Statistics Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 425 Dr. Aftab Khan Engineering Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 426 Dr. Aftab Raza Jarwar Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 427 Dr. Afzal Ahmed Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 428 Dr. Afzal Ahmed Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 429 Dr. Afzal Hussain Environmental Sciences University of Lahore PhD 430 Dr. Afzal Hussain Environmental Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 431 Dr. Afzal Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 432 Dr. Agha Amad Nabi Social Sciences Government College University PhD 433 Dr. Agha Kashif Arshad Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Management & Technology PhD 434 Dr. Agha Mushtaque Ahmed Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 435 Dr. Agha Yasir Ali Engineering Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 436 Dr. Agha Zeeshan Mirza Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 437 Dr. Ahlam Sundus Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 438 Dr. Ahlam Sundus Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 439 Dr. Ahmad Raza Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 440 Dr. Ahmad Riaz Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 441 Dr. Ahmad Adeel Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 442 Dr. Ahmad Adeel Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 443 Dr. Ahmad Aizaz Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 444 Dr. Ahmad Ali Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 445 Dr. Ahmad Ali Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 446 Dr. Ahmad Ali Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 447 Dr. Ahmad Ali Shahid Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 448 Dr. Ahmad Bashir Social Sciences DHA Suffa University PhD 449 Dr. Ahmad Bilal Information Technology Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 450 Dr. Ahmad Dawood Agricultural Sciences University of Mianwali PhD 451 Dr. Ahmad Din Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 452 Dr. Ahmad Din Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 453 Dr. Ahmad Ejaz Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 454 Dr. Ahmad Fraz Social Sciences Pakistan Institute of Development Economics PhD 455 Dr. Ahmad Hassan Butt Information Technology University of Management & Technology PhD 456 Dr. Ahmad Hussain Engineering Sciences DHA Suffa University PhD 457 Mr. Ahmad Ibne Yousaf Health Sciences Minhaj University MPhil 458 Dr. Ahmad Javid Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 459 Dr. Ahmad Kamran Malik Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 460 Dr. Ahmad Khan Information Technology COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 461 Dr. Ahmad Mahmood Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 462 Ahmad Muaz Qamar 463 Dr. Ahmad Naeem Multidisciplinary Gomal University PhD 464 Dr. Ahmad Naeem Akhtar Engineering Sciences Lahore Garrison University PhD 465 Dr. Ahmad Naeem Shahzad Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 466 Dr. Ahmad Nawaz Social Sciences Lahore School of Economics PhD 467 Dr. Ahmad Nawaz Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 468 Dr. Ahmad Raza Social Sciences Imperial College of Business Studies PhD 469 Dr. Ahmad Raza Shahid Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 470 Dr. Ahmad Salman Khan Information Technology University of Lahore PhD 471 Dr. Ahmad Salman Khan Information Technology University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 472 Dr. Ahmad Sattar Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 473 Dr. Ahmad Sher Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University (Layyah Campus) PhD 474 Dr. Ahmad Timsal Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 475 Dr. Ahmad Tisman Pasha Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 476 Dr. Ahmad Waqas Information Technology Institute of Business Administration (IBA) PhD 477 Dr. Ahmad Zaheer Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 478 Dr. Ahmad Zaheer Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 479 Dr. Ahmed Abdul Hameed Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 480 Dr. Ahmed Abdul Hameed Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 481 Dr. Ahmed Ali Tagar Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 482 Dr. Ahmed Arif Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 483 Dr. Ahmed Bilal Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore PhD 484 Dr. Ahmed Bilal Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 485 Dr. Ahmed Bilal Waqar Health Sciences Imperial College of Business Studies PhD 486 Dr. Ahmed Imran Social Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 487 Dr. Ahmed Mateen Engineering Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 488 Dr. Ahmed Nouman Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 489 Ahmed Raza 490 Dr. Ahmed Raza Cheema Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 491 Dr. Ahmed Raza Ul Mustafa Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 492 Dr. Ahmed Saeed Minhas Social Sciences DHA Suffa University PhD 493 Dr. Ahmed Shafique Joyo Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 494 Dr. Ahmed Usman Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 495 Dr. Ahmed Waqas Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 496 Dr. Ahsaan Ahmed Chemical Sciences PhD 497 Dr. Ahsan Shahzad Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 498 Dr. Ahsan Akram Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 499 Dr. Ahsan Ali Ashraf Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 500 Dr. Ahsan Ali Ashraf Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 501 Dr. Ahsan Anjum Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 502 Mr. Ahsan Fareed Shah Mathematics & Statistics University of Okara MPhil 503 Dr. Ahsan Illahi Physics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 504 Dr. Ahsan Mahmood Ahmed Social Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 505 Dr. Ahsan Nazir Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 506 Dr. Ahsan Riaz Social Sciences Government College University PhD 507 Dr. Ahsan Saadat Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 508 Dr. Ahsan Sarwar Rana Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 509 Dr. Ahsanullah Soomro Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 510 Dr. Ahsen Maqsoom Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 511 Dr. Ahson Jabbar Shaikh Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 512 Dr. Ahtaram Bibi Chemical Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 513 Dr. Ahtasham Sajid Information Technology Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 514 Dr. Aiesha Ahmad Information Technology National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 515 AIESHA ISHAQUE 516 Prof. Aijaz Hussain Soomro Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 517 Dr. Aijaz Mustafa Hashmi Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 518 Dr. Aima Iram Batool Biological Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 519 Dr. Aimal Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 520 Ms. Aiman Kamran Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 521 Ms. Aiman Kamran Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 522 Mr. Ain Ul Abad Syed Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University Masters 523 Dr. Aisha Azhar Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 524 Dr. Aisha Aziz Chemical Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 525 Dr. Aisha Jalil Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 526 Dr. Aisha Jalil Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 527 Dr. Aisha Mobashar Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 528 Dr. Aisha Mobashar Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 529 Dr. Aisha Mushtaq Biological Sciences Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 530 Dr. Aisha Saddiqa Chemical Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 531 Dr. Aisha Shahzad Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 532 Dr. Aisha Siddiqa Information Technology Iqra University PhD 533 Dr. Aisha Siddiqua Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 534 Dr. Aisha Tahir Biological Sciences University of Health Sciences PhD 535 Dr. Aisha Waheed Qurashi Biological Sciences Lahore Garrison University PhD 536 Dr. Aisha Zubair Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 537 Dr. Aisha. Sana Biological Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 538 Dr. Aishah Siddiquah Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 539 Dr. Ajid ur Rehman Social Sciences Riphah International University PhD 540 Dr. Ajmal Shah Engineering Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 541 Dr. Akash Fatima Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 542 Dr. Akbar Ali Physics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 543 Dr. AKbar Azam Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 544 Dr. Akbar Azam Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 545 Dr. Akbar Khan Biological Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 546 Dr. Akbar Zada Mathematics & Statistics University of Peshawar PhD 547 Prof. Akeel Ahmed Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 548 Dr. Akhlaq Ahmad Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 549 Dr. Akhlaq Ahmad Bhatti Mathematics & Statistics National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 550 Dr. Akhlaq Hussain Physics University of Peshawar PhD 551 Dr. Akhtar Ali Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 552 Dr. Akhtar Ali Social Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 553 Dr. Akhtar Hameed Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 554 Dr. Akhtar Hussain Jalbani Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 555 Dr. Akhtar Hussain Markhand Earth Sciences University of Sindh PhD 556 Dr. Akhtar Hussain Shar Biological Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 557 Dr. Akhtar Iqbal Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 558 Dr. Akhtar Jamil Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 559 Dr. Akhtar Malik Muhammad Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 560 Dr. Akhtar Muhammad Chemical Sciences Islamia University PhD 561 Akhtar Munir 562 Dr. Akhtar Munir Social Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 563 Dr. Akhtar Nawaz Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 564 Dr. Akhtar Rasool Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 565 Dr. Akhtar Rasool Asif Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 566 Dr. Akhtar Rasul Health Sciences Government College University PhD 567 Dr. Akhtar Zaman Biological Sciences University of Buner PhD 568 Dr. Akhtiar Ali Social Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 569 Dr. Akif Zia Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 570 Dr. Akmal Shahzad Social Sciences Preston University PhD 571 Dr. Alam Khan Social Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 572 Dr. Alam Sher Agricultural Sciences Ghazi University PhD 573 Dr. Alam Zaib Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 574 Dr. Alam Zeb Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 575 Dr. Alam Zeb Chemical Sciences Riphah International University PhD 576 Dr. Alam Zeb Khan Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 577 Dr. Alamgeer Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 578 Dr. Alamgir Mathematics & Statistics University of Peshawar PhD 579 Dr. Albert John Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 580 Dr. Albert John Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 581 Dr. Aleena Sumrin Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 582 Dr. Ali Abdullah Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 583 Dr. Ali Afzal Malik Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 584 Dr. Ali Ahmad Engineering Sciences Minhaj University PhD 585 Dr. Ali Ahmad Farooq Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 586 Dr. Ali Akbar Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 587 Dr. Ali Akbar Siddique Engineering Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 588 Dr. Ali Akhtar Health Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 589 Dr. Ali Arshad Information Technology National University of Technology (NUTECH) PhD 590 Dr. Ali Arshad Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 591 Dr. Ali Asghar Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 592 Ali Ashher Zaidi 593 Dr. Ali Bahader Chemical Sciences Hazara University PhD 594 Dr. Ali Burhan Khan Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 595 Dr. Ali Dad Chandio Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 596 Dr. Ali Faisal Murtaza Engineering Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 597 Dr. Ali Haider Chemical Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 598 Dr. Ali Hassan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 599 Dr. Ali Hussain Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 600 Dr. Ali Hussain Kazim Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 601 Mr. Ali Hussain Farrukh Social Sciences Government College University MPhil 602 Dr. Ali Hussnain Physics Minhaj University PhD 603 Dr. Ali Iftikhar Choudhary Social Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 604 Dr. Ali Iqtadar Mirza Environmental Sciences Government College University PhD 605 Dr. Ali Javed Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 606 Dr. Ali Javed Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 607 Ali Mubashir 608 Dr. Ali Muhammad Biological Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 609 Dr. Ali Muhammad Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 610 Dr. Ali Muhammad Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 611 Dr. Ali Muhammad Waryah Biological Sciences Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences PhD 612 Dr. Ali Nadeem Physics Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 613 Dr. Ali Nasir Engineering Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 614 Dr. Ali Nawab Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 615 Dr. Ali Nawaz Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 616 Dr. Ali Noman Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 617 Dr. Ali Noor Shah Biological Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 618 Dr. Ali Rauf Engineering Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 619 Dr. Ali Raza Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 620 Dr. Ali Raza Information Technology University of Sufism and Modern Sciences PhD 621 Dr. Ali Raza Social Sciences University of Haripur PhD 622 Ali Raza 623 Dr. Ali Raza Khoso Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 624 Dr. Ali Raza Siddiqui Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 625 Dr. Ali Saeed Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 626 Dr. Ali Saeed Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 627 Dr. Ali Saeed Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 628 Dr. Ali Sarosh Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 629 Dr. Ali Sharif Health Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 630 Dr. Ali Talha Khalil Biological Sciences Lady Reading Hospital Peshawar PhD 631 Dr. Ali Turab Jafry Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 632 Dr. Ali Usman Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 633 Dr. Ali Zaman Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 634 Dr. Ali Zarrar Khokhar Engineering Sciences Foundation University PhD 635 Dr. Ali Zeb Social Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 636 Dr. Ali Zohaib Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 637 Dr. Alia Ahmed Social Sciences National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 638 Dr. Alia Arshad Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 639 Dr. Alia Asmat Health Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 640 Dr. Alia Ayub Social Sciences Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 641 Dr. Alia Erum Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 642 Dr. Alia Qadir Social Sciences Riphah International University PhD 643 Dr. Alina Mirza Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 644 Dr. Alishba Hania Social Sciences Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 645 Dr. Aliya Abbasi Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 646 Dr. Aliya Fahmi Mathematics & Statistics The University of Faisalabad PhD 647 Mrs. Aliya Hayat Biological Sciences Jinnah University for Women MPhil 648 Dr. Aliya Ibrar Chemical Sciences University of Haripur PhD 649 Dr. Aliya Sikandar Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 650 Dr. Allah Bakhsh Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 651 Dr. Allah Bukhsh Chemical Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 652 Dr. Allah Ditta Agricultural Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 653 Dr. Allah Ditta Engineering Sciences University of Education PhD 654 Dr. Allah Ditta Biological Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 655 Dr. Allah Rakha Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 656 Dr. Allah Rakha Biological Sciences University of Health Sciences PhD 657 Dr. Allah Wadhayo Gandahi Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 658 Dr. Allahnawaz Khan Biological Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 659 Dr. Allahnoor Khan Social Sciences Institute of Education & Research PhD 660 Dr. Almas Abbasi Information Technology International Islamic University PhD 661 Dr. Almas Jabeen Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 662 Dr. Almas Khanum Social Sciences Government College University PhD 663 Dr. Almas Shoaib Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 664 Dr. Almazea Fatima Social Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 665 Dr. Altaf Karim Physics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 666 Dr. Altaf Hussain Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 667 Dr. Altaf Hussain Information Technology Institute of Space Technology PhD 668 Dr. Altaf Hussain Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 669 Dr. Altaf Hussain Lahori Environmental Sciences Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 670 Dr. Altaf Noonari Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 671 Dr. Altaf Ur Rahman Physics Riphah International University PhD 672 Dr. Alvina Gul Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 673 Dr. Alvina Rafiq Butt Physics Lahore Garrison University PhD 674 Dr. Amad Zafar Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 675 Dr. Amad Zafar Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 676 Dr. Aman Ullah Chemical Sciences Abasyn University PhD 677 Dr. Aman Karim Chemical Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 678 Dr. Aman Ullah Mathematics & Statistics University of Malakand PhD 679 Dr. Aman Ullah Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 680 Dr. Aman Ullah Malik Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 681 Dr. Aman ur Rehman Engineering Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 682 Dr. AMANULLAH Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 683 Dr. Amanullah Mahar Environmental Sciences University of Sindh PhD 684 Dr. Amanullah Yasin Information Technology Air University PhD 685 Dr. Amar Nasir Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 686 Dr. Amar Ul Hassan Khawaja Engineering Sciences University of Wah PhD 687 Dr. Amara Dar Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 688 Dr. Amara Khan Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 689 Dr. Amara Malik Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 690 Dr. amatul R Chaudhary Social Sciences National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 691 Dr. Amber Afroz Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 692 Dr. Amber Muhammad Ilyas Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 693 Dr. Amber Nawaz Kiani Biological Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 694 Dr. Amber Rehana Solangi Chemical Sciences University of Sindh PhD 695 Dr. Amber Sultan Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 696 Dr. Amber Sultan Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 697 Dr. Amber Tehseen Health Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 698 Dr. Ambreen Aleem Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 699 Dr. Ambreen Aslam Environmental Sciences University of Lahore PhD 700 Dr. Ambreen Aslam Environmental Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 701 Dr. Ambreen Ayub Physics Women University PhD 702 Dr. Ambreen Bano Mathematics & Statistics Riphah International University PhD 703 Dr. Ambreen Fatima Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 704 Dr. Ambreen Gul Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 705 Dr. Ambreen Gul Social Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 706 Dr. Ambreen Huma Chemical Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 707 Dr. Ambreen Insaf Physics University of Karachi PhD 708 Dr. Ambreen Khan Mathematics & Statistics Air University PhD 709 Dr. Ambreen Khawar Health Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 710 Dr. Ambreen Malik Uttra Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 711 Dr. Ambreen Naz Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 712 Dr. Ambreen Rafiq Chemical Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 713 Dr. Ambreen Salahuddin Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 714 Dr. Ambreen Shah Chemical Sciences University of Sindh PhD 715 Dr. Ambreen Usmani Health Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 716 Dr. Ambrin Fatima Health Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 717 Dr. Ambrina Khatoon Biological Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 718 Dr. Ambrina Qureshi Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 719 Dr. Amdad Ullah Social Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 720 Dr. Ameen Shahid Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 721 Dr. Ameer Ali Buriro Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 722 Dr. Ameer Fawad Zahoor Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 723 Dr. Amen Shamim Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 724 Dr. Amena Ejaz Aziz Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 725 Dr. Amena Rahim Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 726 Dr. Amena Urooj Mathematics & Statistics Pakistan Institute of Development Economics PhD 727 Dr. Amer Akhtar Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 728 Dr. Amer Aziz Social Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 729 Dr. Amer Habib Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 730 Prof. Amer Jamil Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 731 Dr. Amer Rajput Social Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 732 Dr. Amer Sohail Kashif Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 733 Dr. Amin Fahim Health Sciences Islamia University PhD 734 Dr. Amin Ur Rahman Physics Riphah International University PhD 735 Dr. Amina Physics Bacha Khan University PhD 736 Dr. Amina Elahi Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 737 Dr. Amina Elahi Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 738 Dr. Amina Muazzam Butt Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 739 Dr. Amina Obaid Khawaja Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 740 Dr. Amir Abbas Engineering Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 741 Dr. Amir Ali Abbasi Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 742 Dr. Amir Gulzar Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 743 Dr. Amir Hamza Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 744 Dr. Amir Hayat Social Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 745 Dr. Amir Ikhlaq Environmental Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 746 Dr. Amir Ikram Social Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 747 Dr. Amir Ishaque Social Sciences Air University PhD 748 Dr. Amir Ismail Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 749 Dr. Amir Jahan Khan Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration PhD 750 Dr. Amir Jan Social Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 751 Dr. Amir Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Swat PhD 752 Dr. Amir Mahmood Soomro Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 753 Dr. Amir Manzoor Social Sciences Karachi School for Business & Leadership PhD 754 Dr. Amir Mehmod Information Technology Zia-ud-Din University PhD 755 Dr. Amir Muhammad Engineering Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 756 Dr. Amir Muhammad Afzal Physics Riphah International University PhD 757 Dr. Amir Naveed Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 758 Dr. Amir Rafique Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 759 Dr. Amir Raza Biological Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 760 Dr. Amir Raza Agricultural Sciences PAEC Nuclear Institute for Food and Agriculture (NIFA) PhD 761 Dr. Amir Raza Agricultural Sciences PAEC Nuclear Institute for Food and Agriculture (NIFA) PhD 762 Dr. Amir Razi Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 763 Dr. Amir Razi Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 764 Dr. Amir Riaz Social Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 765 Dr. Amir Shafeeq Engineering Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 766 Dr. Amir Shakeel Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 767 Mr. Amir Sohail Khan Engineering Sciences Islamia University MPhil 768 Dr. Amir Sultan Biological Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 769 Dr. Amir Waseem Chemical Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 770 Dr. Amir Zaib Abbasi Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 771 Dr. Amjad Ali Mathematics & Statistics University of Swat PhD 772 Dr. Amjad Ali Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 773 Dr. Amjad Ali Physics University of Okara PhD 774 Dr. Amjad Ali Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 775 Dr. Amjad Ali Mathematics & Statistics The Islamia College PhD 776 Dr. Amjad Ali Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 777 Dr. Amjad Ali Agricultural Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 778 Amjad Aslam 779 Dr. Amjad Farooq Information Technology University of Engineering & Technology PhD 780 Dr. Amjad Hassan Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 781 Dr. Amjad Hussain Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 782 Dr. Amjad Hussain Chemical Sciences University of Okara PhD 783 Dr. Amjad Hussain Mathematics & Statistics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 784 Dr. Amjad Hussain Zahid Information Technology University of Management & Technology PhD 785 Dr. Amjad Islam Aqib Biological Sciences Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences PhD 786 Dr. Amjad Khan Information Technology Hamdard University PhD 787 Dr. Amjad Khan Chemical Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 788 Dr. Amjad Khan Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 789 Dr. Amjad Masood Social Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 790 Dr. Amjad Mehmood Information Technology Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 791 Dr. Amjad Rashid Kayani Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 792 Dr. Amjad Reba Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 793 Dr. Amjad Riaz Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 794 Dr. Amjad Sohail Shah Physics Government College University PhD 795 Dr. Amjad Sultan Agricultural Sciences University of Karachi PhD 796 Dr. Amjad Younas Social Sciences Mohi-ud-Din Islamic University PhD 797 Dr. Amjed Javid Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 798 Dr. Ammar Abid Social Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 799 Dr. Ammar Ahmad Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore PhD 800 Dr. Ammar Ahmad Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 801 Dr. Ammar Ahmed Khan Physics Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 802 Dr. Ammar Arshad Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 803 Dr. Ammar Hasan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 804 Dr. Ammar Masood Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 805 Dr. Ammar Mushtaq Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 806 Dr. Ammara Farukh Social Sciences University of Education PhD 807 Dr. Ammara Nawaz Cheema Mathematics & Statistics Air University PhD 808 Dr. Ammara Nosheen Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 809 Dr. Ammara Nosheen Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 810 Dr. Ammara Saleem Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 811 Dr. Ammarah Hasnain Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 812 Dr. Ammarah Hasnain Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 813 Dr. Amna Arif Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 814 Dr. Amna Basharat Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 815 Dr. Amna Bashir Chemical Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 816 Dr. Amna Kalsoom Mathematics & Statistics International Islamic University PhD 817 Dr. Amna Khalid Social Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 818 Dr. Amna Khawar Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 819 Dr. Amna Niazi Social Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 820 Dr. Amna Rashid Tariq Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 821 Dr. Amna Rashid Tariq Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 822 Dr. Amna Safdar Physics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 823 Prof. Amna Sahar Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 824 Dr. Amna Shifa Information Technology Islamia University PhD 825 Dr. Amna Siddique Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 826 Amna Tariq 827 Dr. Amna Younus Biological Sciences National Institute of Health (NIH) PhD 828 Dr. Amna Yousaf Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 829 Dr. Amtul Qayoom Chemical Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 830 Dr. Anab Fatima Biological Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 831 Dr. Anam Iqbal Social Sciences Minhaj University PhD 832 Dr. Anam Moosa Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 833 Dr. ANAM MUNAWAR Biological Sciences University of Health Sciences PhD 834 Dr. Anam Naz Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 835 Dr. Anam Naz Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 836 Dr. Anas Bin Aqeel Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 837 Dr. Anas Sarwar Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 838 Dr. Anas Sarwar Qureshi Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 839 Dr. Anbreena Rasool Health Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 840 Dr. Andleeb Batool Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 841 Dr. Aneel Kumar Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 842 Dr. Aneela Anwar Chemical Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 843 Dr. Aneela Gill Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 844 Dr. Aneela Maqsood Social Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 845 Dr. Aneela Wakeel Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 846 Dr. Aneela Yasmeen Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 847 Dr. Aneela Zameer Durrani Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 848 Dr. Aneeqa Noor Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 849 Dr. Anees Ahmed Khalil Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 850 Dr. Anees Ahmed Khalil Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 851 Dr. Anees ur Rehman Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 852 Dr. Aneesa Sultan Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 853 Dr. Anila Fariq Environmental Sciences University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 854 Dr. Anila Fatima Shakil Social Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 855 Dr. Anila Usman Mathematics & Statistics Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 856 Dr. Anis Ali Shah Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 857 Dr. Anjum Ayub Chemical Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 858 Dr. Anjum Bano Kazimi Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 859 Dr. Anjum Halai Social Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 860 Dr. Anjum Ihsan Social Sciences The Islamia College PhD 861 Dr. Anjum Nawab Agricultural Sciences University of Karachi PhD 862 Dr. Anjum Naz Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 863 Dr. Anjum Tahira Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 864 Dr. Anjum Zia Information Technology Lahore College for Women University PhD 865 Dr. Ansa Madeeha Zafar Chemical Sciences Government Sadiq College Women University PhD 866 Dr. Ansar Ahmed Abbasi Biological Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 867 Dr. Ansar Mehmood Biological Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 868 Dr. Ansar Munir Shah Information Technology Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 869 Dr. Anser Ali Biological Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 870 Dr. Ansir A Rajput Social Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 871 Dr. Anum Ali Information Technology Lahore Garrison University PhD 872 Dr. Anum Gul Biological Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 873 Dr. Anum Ishaq Agricultural Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 874 Anum Liaquat 875 Dr. Anum Masood Information Technology COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 876 Mrs. Anum Nazir Health Sciences The University of Faisalabad MPhil 877 Dr. Anwaar Ahmed Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 878 Dr. Anwar Ali Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 879 Dr. Anwar Ali Shad Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 880 Dr. Anwar Ali Shah Health Sciences Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University PhD 881 Dr. Anwar Ghani Information Technology International Islamic University PhD 882 Dr. Anwar Hussain Social Sciences University of Swat PhD 883 Dr. Anwar Khan Engineering Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 884 Dr. Anwar Khan Social Sciences Khushal Khan Khattak University PhD 885 Dr. Anwar Qadir Earth Sciences University of Haripur PhD 886 Dr. Anwar Ul Haq Engineering Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 887 Dr. Anwar ul Haq Ali Shah Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 888 Dr. Anwar Ullah Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 889 Dr. Anzar Mahmood Engineering Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 890 Dr. Aqeel Ahmed Bazmi Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 891 Dr. Aqeel ur Rehman Information Technology COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 892 Dr. Aqeel ur Rehman Information Technology Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 893 Dr. Aqeela Ashraf Biological Sciences Lahore Garrison University PhD 894 Dr. Aqib Mashood Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 895 Dr. Aqif Anwar Chaudhry Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 896 Dr. Aqila Shaheen Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 897 Dr. Aqila Shaheen Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 898 Dr. Aqrab ul Ahmad Physics Riphah International University PhD 899 Dr. Aqsa Habib Chemical Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 900 Dr. Aqsa Ikram Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 901 Dr. Aqsa Ikram Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 902 Dr. Aqsa Imran Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 903 Ms. Aqsa Khalid Physics University of Agriculture PhD 904 Ms. Aqsa Shaikh Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology Masters 905 Dr. Arab Naz Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 906 Dr. Arabella Bhutto Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 907 Dr. Arbab Abdur Rahim Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 908 Dr. Arbab Mohammad Toufiq Physics Hazara University PhD 909 Dr. Arbab Sikandar Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 910 Dr. Arbab Waseem Abbas Information Technology The University of Agriculture PhD 911 Dr. Areeb Ahmed Engineering Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 912 Dr. Areeba Khan Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 913 Dr. Areej Fatima Information Technology Lahore Garrison University PhD 914 Arefa Akhter 915 Dr. Arfa Akram Khan Chemical Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 916 Dr. Arfaa Sajid Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 917 Dr. Arfaa Sajid Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 918 Dr. Arfan Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 919 Dr. ARFAN AHMAD Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 920 Dr. Arfan Ahmed Gilal Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 921 Dr. Arfan Ali Nagra Information Technology Lahore Garrison University PhD 922 Dr. Arfan Arshad Information Technology Institute for Art and Culture PhD 923 Dr. Arfan Jaffar Information Technology The Superior College PhD 924 Dr. Arfan Yousaf Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 925 Dr. Arham Muslim Information Technology National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 926 Dr. Ariba Farooq Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 927 Dr. Ariba Farooq Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 928 Dr. Arif Ali Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 929 Mr. Arif Hussain Multidisciplinary Karakurum International University MPhil 930 Dr. Arif Hussain Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 931 Dr. Arif Hussain Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 932 Dr. Arif Nazir Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 933 Dr. Arif Nazir Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 934 Dr. Arif Nazir Butt Social Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 935 Dr. Arif Ullah Information Technology Riphah International University PhD 936 Dr. Arif Ullah Physics University of Malakand PhD 937 Dr. Arif Ullah Khan Mathematics & Statistics Gomal University PhD 938 Dr. Arif Ur Rahman Information Technology Bahria University PhD 939 Dr. Arifa Bano Talpur Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 940 Dr. Arifa Mehreen Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 941 Dr. Arifa Mehreen Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 942 Dr. Arifa Savanur Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 943 Dr. Armghan Shahzad Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 944 Dr. Arooj Adeel Mathematics & Statistics University of Education PhD 945 Dr. Arooj Zeb Social Sciences Virtual University of Pakistan (Peshawar Campus) PhD 946 Dr. Aroona Hashmi Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 947 Dr. Aroosa Kanwal Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 948 Dr. Aroosh Shabbir Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 949 Dr. Aroosh Shabbir Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 950 Dr. Arruje Hameed Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 951 Dr. Arsalan Ahmed Mathematics & Statistics Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 952 Dr. Arsalan Ahmed Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 953 Dr. Arsalan Aziz Mathematics & Statistics National Skills University PhD 954 Dr. Arsalan Hussain Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 955 Dr. Arshad Ahmad Information Technology Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 956 Dr. Arshad Ali Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 957 Dr. Arshad Ali Social Sciences Greenwich University PhD 958 Dr. Arshad Ali Bhatti Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 959 Dr. Arshad Ali Khan Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 960 Dr. Arshad Ali Shedayi Environmental Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 961 Dr. Arshad Iqbal Engineering Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 962 Dr. Arshad Iqbal Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 963 Dr. Arshad Islam Biological Sciences Lady Reading Hospital Peshawar PhD 964 Dr. Arshad Javid Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 965 Dr. Arshad Javid Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 966 Dr. Arshad Khan Bangash Social Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 967 Dr. Arshad Mahmood Malik Social Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 968 Dr. Arshad Majid Mirza Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 969 Dr. Arshad Mehmood Abbasi Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 970 Dr. Arshad Nawaz Malik Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 971 Dr. Arshad Riaz Mathematics & Statistics University of Education PhD 972 Dr. Arshad Zahoor Biological Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 973 Dr. Arshed Ali Mathematics & Statistics The Islamia College PhD 974 Dr. Arshi Naz Biological Sciences Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences PhD 975 Dr. Arshi Saleem Hashmi Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 976 Dr. Arshia Butt Biological Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 977 Dr. Arshia Hashmi Social Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 978 Dr. Arshia Mukhtar Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 979 Dr. Arshia Tabassum Biological Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 980 Dr. Arslan Afzal Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 981 Dr. Arslan Ahmed Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 982 Dr. Arslan Ahmed Amin Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 983 Dr. Arslan Ali Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 984 Dr. Arslan Arif Engineering Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 985 Dr. Arslan Dawood Butt Engineering Sciences Government College University PhD 986 Dr. Arslan Iftikhar Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 987 Dr. Arslan Qayyum Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 988 Dr. Arslan Qayyum Khan Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 989 Dr. Arslan Qayyum Khan Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 990 Dr. Arslan Sarwar Biological Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 991 Dr. Arslan Sehgal Biological Sciences University of Okara PhD 992 Dr. Arslan Shaukat Information Technology National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 993 Aruba Tajwar 994 Dr. Arusa Aftab Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 995 Dr. Asad Ali Mathematics & Statistics Hazara University PhD 996 Dr. Asad Ali Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Space Technology PhD 997 Dr. Asad Afzal Humayon Social Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 998 Dr. Asad Ali Rind Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 999 Dr. Asad Ali Shah Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1000 Dr. Asad Hameed Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1001 Dr. Asad Hassan Butt Social Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 1002 Dr. Asad Hussain Shah Agricultural Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 1003 Dr. Asad Hussain Shah Biological Sciences University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 1004 Dr. Asad Islam Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 1005 Dr. Asad Javed Social Sciences Hazara University PhD 1006 Dr. Asad Muhammad Khan Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1007 Dr. Asad Naeem Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1008 Dr. Asad Ullah Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1009 Dr. Asad Ullah Biological Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 1010 Dr. Asad Ullah Chemical Sciences The Islamia College PhD 1011 Dr. Asad Ullah Social Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 1012 Dr. Asad Ullah Social Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 1013 Dr. Asad Ullah Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1014 Dr. Asad Ullah Mathematics & Statistics University of Lakki Marwat PhD 1015 Dr. Asad Ullah Mathematics & Statistics Karakurum International University PhD 1016 Dr. Asad Ullah Khan Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1017 Dr. Asad Ullah Qazi Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1018 Dr. Asad ur Rehman Khan Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1019 Dr. Asad Waqar Engineering Sciences Bahria University PhD 1020 Dr. Asadullah Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1021 Dr. Asadullah Khan Social Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 1022 Dr. Asadullah Memon Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1023 Dr. Asaf Niwaz Social Sciences University of Haripur PhD 1024 Dr. Asar Ali Engineering Sciences Qurtaba University of Science & Information Technology PhD 1025 Dr. Asfand Fahad Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 1026 Mr. ASFANDYAR KHALIL Social Sciences Khyber Medical University Masters 1027 Dr. Asfandyar Khan Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1028 Dr. Asfandyar Khan Mathematics & Statistics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1029 Dr. Asfia Obaid Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1030 Dr. Asghar Abbas Biological Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 1031 Dr. Asghar Ali Mathematics & Statistics Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 1032 Dr. Asghar Ali Social Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1033 Dr. Asghar Ali Earth Sciences University of Malakand PhD 1034 Dr. Asghar Ali Mathematics & Statistics University of Education (Multan Campus) PhD 1035 Dr. Asghar Ali Alias Daahar Hakro Earth Sciences University of Sindh PhD 1036 Mr. Asghar Ali Arshad Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 1037 Mr. Asghar Ali Arshad Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 1038 Dr. Asghar Ali Chandio Information Technology Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1039 Dr. Asghar Ali Kamboh Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1040 Dr. Asghar Ali Maitlo Mathematics & Statistics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1041 Dr. Asghar Khan Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 1042 Asghar Khan 1043 Asghar Khan 1044 Dr. Asghar Khan Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1045 Dr. Asghari Bano Biological Sciences University of Wah PhD 1046 Prof. Asghari Maqsood Physics Air University PhD 1047 Dr. Ashar Ahmed Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1048 Prof. Asher Fawwad Biological Sciences Baqai Medical University PhD 1049 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad Chemical Sciences Abasyn University (Islamabad Campus) PhD 1050 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Swabi PhD 1051 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1052 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1053 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1054 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1055 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1056 Dr. Ashfaq Ahmad Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 1057 Dr. Ashfaq Ali Biological Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 1058 Dr. Ashfaq Habib Social Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 1059 Dr. Ashfaq Hussain Farooqi Information Technology Air University PhD 1060 Dr. Ashfaque Ahmad SHAH Social Sciences University of Baltistan PhD 1061 Dr. Ashfaque Ahmed Hashmani Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1062 Dr. Ashfaque Hasan Khan Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1063 Dr. Ashif Sajjad Biological Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 1064 Ashiq Rabbani 1065 Dr. Ashique Hussain Jatoi Chemical Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 1066 Dr. Ashraf Ali Chemical Sciences University of Haripur PhD 1067 Dr. Asia Bibi Biological Sciences Women University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 1068 Dr. Asia Bibi Biological Sciences The Women University PhD 1069 Dr. Asia Iqbal Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1070 Dr. Asia Mushtaq Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 1071 Dr. Asia Nosheen Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1072 Ms. Asia Shahab Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology Masters 1073 Dr. Asif Ahmed Shaikh Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1074 Dr. Asif Ali Biological Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 1075 Dr. Asif Ali Laghari Information Technology Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 1076 Dr. Asif Ali Memon Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1077 Dr. Asif Ali Qaiser Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1078 Dr. Asif Ali Shah Physics Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1079 Dr. Asif Ali Shah Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1080 Dr. Asif Ali Shaikh Mathematics & Statistics Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1081 Dr. Asif Ali Siyal Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1082 Dr. Asif Aziz Memon Information Technology Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1083 Dr. Asif Hanif Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 1084 Dr. Asif Hanif Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1085 Dr. Asif Hussain Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1086 Dr. Asif Hussain Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1087 Dr. Asif Iqbal Biological Sciences Riphah International University PhD 1088 Dr. Asif Iqbal Social Sciences Al-Hamd Islamic University PhD 1089 Dr. Asif Iqbal Social Sciences University of Education PhD 1090 Dr. Asif Iqbal Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Peshawar Campus) PhD 1091 Dr. Asif Israr Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 1092 Dr. Asif Jamil Ahmad Siddiqui Social Sciences Qurtaba University of Science & Information Technology PhD 1093 Dr. Asif Khurshid Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 1094 Dr. Asif Mahmood Biological Sciences University of Chakwal PhD 1095 Dr. Asif Mir Biological Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1096 Dr. Asif Nadeem Biological Sciences Virtual University of Pakistan PhD 1097 Dr. Asif Nadeem Tabish Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1098 Dr. Asif Nawaz Information Technology Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1099 Dr. Asif Nawaz Chemical Sciences Gomal University PhD 1100 Dr. Asif Niaz Multidisciplinary University of Lahore PhD 1101 Dr. Asif Niaz Multidisciplinary University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1102 Dr. Asif Raheem Biological Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1103 Dr. Asif Raza Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Karachi PhD 1104 Dr. Asif Saeed Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 1105 Dr. Asif Saeed Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1106 Dr. Asif Wali Agricultural Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 1107 Dr. Asif Yaseen Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1108 Dr. Asifa Kamal Mathematics & Statistics Lahore College for Women University PhD 1109 Dr. Asifullah Khan Engineering Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 1110 Dr. Asifullah Khan Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1111 Dr. Asim Anwar Social Sciences COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 1112 Dr. Asim Aslam Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1113 Dr. Asim Dilawer Bakhshi Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1114 Dr. Asim Farooq Engineering Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 1115 Dr. Asim Gulzar Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1116 Dr. Asim Imdad Wagan Information Technology Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 1117 Dr. Asim Iqbal Social Sciences University of Education PhD 1118 Dr. Asim Khan Engineering Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 1119 Dr. Asim Laeeq Khan Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1120 Dr. Asim Mansha Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 1121 Dr. Asim Mehmood Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) PhD 1122 Dr. Asim Muhammad Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 1123 Dr. Asim Naseem Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 1124 Dr. Asim Pervaiz Health Sciences University of Health Sciences PhD 1125 Asim Shahzad 1126 Dr. Asim Shahzad Biological Sciences Mohi-ud-Din Islamic University PhD 1127 Dr. Asim Shahzad Information Technology Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 1128 Dr. Asim Umer Engineering Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1129 Dr. Asim ur Rehman Khan Engineering Sciences IndusUniversity PhD 1130 Dr. Asim Zafar Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 1131 Dr. Asim Zaheer Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1132 Dr. Asima Azam Biological Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 1133 Dr. Asima Zahid Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 1134 Dr. Asiya Zenab Kazmi Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 1135 Dr. Aslam Bukero Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1136 Dr. Aslam Faqeer Mohammad Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1137 Dr. Aslam Khan Chemical Sciences Riphah International University PhD 1138 Dr. Aslam Pervez Memon Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1139 Dr. Asma Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) PhD 1140 Dr. Asma Basit Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 1141 Dr. Asma Abdul Rehman Social Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 1142 Dr. Asma Ahmed Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1143 Dr. Asma Ahmed Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1144 Dr. Asma Ansari Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1145 Dr. Asma Arif Social Sciences University of Wah PhD 1146 Dr. Asma Babar Biological Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 1147 Dr. Asma Chaudhary Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 1148 Dr. Asma Gul Biological Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1149 Dr. Asma Hanif Agricultural Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1150 Dr. Asma Hayat Physics Government College University PhD 1151 Dr. Asma Hyder Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration PhD 1152 Dr. Asma Imran Social Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1153 Dr. Asma Imran Agricultural Sciences NIBGE Agricultural Biotechnology Division, PAEC PhD 1154 Dr. Asma Irfan Biological Sciences Islamabad Medical & Dental College PhD 1155 Dr. Asma Irshad Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1156 Dr. Asma Jamil Environmental Sciences Bahria University PhD 1157 Dr. Asma Khalid Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 1158 Dr. Asma Khalid Mathematics & Statistics Air University (Multan Campus) PhD 1159 Dr. Asma Khalid Mathematics & Statistics Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 1160 Dr. Asma Khan Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1161 Dr. Asma Khurshid Biological Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 1162 Dr. Asma Mansoor Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1163 Dr. Asma Naim Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1164 Dr. Asma Naseer Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 1165 Dr. Asma Noureen Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1166 Dr. Asma Noureen Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1167 Dr. Asma Saeed Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 1168 Dr. Asma Saleem Qazi Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 1169 Dr. Asma Shahid Kazi Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1170 Dr. Asma Sohail Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1171 Dr. Asma Tufail Shah Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1172 Dr. Asma Ul Husna Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 1173 Dr. Asma Waheed Qureshi Biological Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 1174 Dr. Asma Zaffar Mathematics & Statistics Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1175 Dr. Asma Zaidi Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1176 Dr. Asmaa Azeem Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1177 Dr. Asmat Ali Earth Sciences Survey of Pakistan PhD 1178 Dr. Asmat Ara Mathematics & Statistics Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology PhD 1179 Dr. Asmat Naz Naz Social Sciences The Women University PhD 1180 Dr. Asmat Ullah Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1181 Dr. Asmat Ullah Biological Sciences Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Medical University PhD 1182 Dr. Asmat Ullah Agricultural Sciences Ayub Agricultural Research Institute (AARI) PhD 1183 Dr. Asmatullah Kaka Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1184 Dr. Asna Mubashra Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1185 Ms. Asra Shanzeh Shabbir Health Sciences University of Management & Technology MPhil 1186 Dr. Asrar Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Education PhD 1187 Dr. Assad Abbas Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1188 Dr. Assad Farooq Engineering Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 1189 Dr. Assad Rehman Mathematics & Statistics University of Education PhD 1190 Dr. Assistant Professor Mathematics & Statistics Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 1191 Dr. Ata Ul Haq Physics Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 1192 Dr. Ata Ullah Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 1193 Dr. Ata ur Rahman Physics The Islamia College PhD 1194 Dr. Ata Ur Rahman Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1195 Dr. Ata ur Rehman Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 1196 Dr. Ataf Ali Altaf Chemical Sciences University of Okara PhD 1197 Dr. Ataul Aziz Ikram Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 1198 Dr. Ataullah Khan Mehmood Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1199 Dr. Ateeq Abdul Rauf Social Sciences Information Technology University of the Punjab PhD 1200 Dr. Ateeq Ur Rehman Information Technology University of Haripur PhD 1201 Dr. Ateeq Ur Rehman Shaheen Engineering Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 1202 Dr. Athar Hussain Environmental Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1203 Dr. Athar Iqbal Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 1204 Dr. Athar Mahmud Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1205 Dr. Athar Rashid Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 1206 Dr. Ather Akhlaq Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 1207 Dr. Ather Farooq Khan Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1208 Dr. Ather Maqsood Ahmed Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1209 Dr. Ather Qayyum Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 1210 Dr. Atia Atiq Physics University of Education (Multan Campus) PhD 1211 Dr. Atia Basheer Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 1212 Dr. Atia Basheer Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1213 Dr. Atif Aftab Ahmed Jilani Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 1214 Dr. Atif Ali Health Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1215 Dr. Atif Ali Gill Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1216 Dr. Atif Ali Khan Khalil Chemical Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 1217 Dr. Atif Ashraf Information Technology University of Central Punjab PhD 1218 Dr. Atif Aziz Social Sciences Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology PhD 1219 Dr. Atif Bilal Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 1220 Dr. Atif Jamal Biological Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 1221 Dr. Atif Javaid Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1222 Dr. Atif Kamil Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1223 Dr. Atif Khan Information Technology The Islamia College PhD 1224 Dr. Atif Khan Jadoon Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1225 Dr. Atif Liaqat Agricultural Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 1226 Mr. Atif Nawaz Khan Social Sciences Government of Punjab Masters 1227 Dr. Atif Raza Jafri Engineering Sciences Bahria University PhD 1228 Dr. Atif Rehman Biological Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 1229 Dr. Atif Saeed Information Technology COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1230 Dr. Atifa Latif Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 1231 Dr. Atifa Masood Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1232 Dr. Atifa Masood Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1233 Dr. Atiq ur Rehman Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1234 Dr. Atiq ur Rehman Physics Riphah International University PhD 1235 Atiqa Aleem 1236 Dr. Atique Ahmed Behan Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1237 Dr. Atta Hussain Shah Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1238 Dr. Atta Ullah Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1239 Dr. Atta Ullah Khan Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 1240 Dr. Atta ur Rahman Social Sciences Institute of Management Sciences PhD 1241 Dr. Atta Ur Rahman Environmental Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1242 Dr. Atta Ur Rehman Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 1243 Dr. Atta ur Rehman Shah Engineering Sciences HITEC University PhD 1244 Dr. Attaullah Sahito Information Technology The Shaikh Ayaz University PhD 1245 Dr. Attiq Ur Rehman Kakar Chemical Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 1246 Dr. Attiqa Naz Chemical Sciences Abasyn University PhD 1247 Dr. Attique Ur Rehman Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 1248 Dr. Attiya Bashir Social Sciences University of Home Economics PhD 1249 Dr. Attya Bhatti Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1250 Dr. Aun Haider Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1251 Dr. Aurang Zeb Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1252 Dr. Aurang Zeb Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1253 Dr. Aurang Zeb Physics Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Abdul Haq Campus) PhD 1254 Dr. Aurangzaib Alizai Social Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 1255 Dr. Aurangzeb Khan Information Technology University of Science & Technology PhD 1256 Dr. Aurangzeb Rashid Masud Engineering Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 1257 Dr. Ausnain Naveed Engineering Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 1258 Dr. Awais Ahmed Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1259 Dr. Awais Altaf Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1260 Dr. Awais Altaf Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1261 Dr. Awais Asif Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 1262 Dr. Awais Gul Airij Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1263 Dr. Awais Gul Khan Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 1264 Dr. Awais Mahmood Engineering Sciences NFC Institute of Engineering & Technology PhD 1265 Dr. Awais Mehmood Kamboh Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1266 Dr. Awais Qasim Information Technology Government College University PhD 1267 Dr. Awais Siddique Saleemi Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 1268 Dr. Ayaz Afsar Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1269 Dr. Ayaz Ahmad Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 1270 Dr. Ayaz Ahmad Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1271 Dr. Ayaz Ahmed Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1272 Dr. Ayaz Ali Engineering Sciences University of Sindh PhD 1273 Dr. Ayaz Ali Khan Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 1274 Dr. Ayaz Farzand Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1275 Dr. Ayaz Mehmood Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 1276 Ayaz Muhammad Hanif 1277 Dr. Ayaz Muhammad Khan Social Sciences University of Education PhD 1278 Dr. Ayaz Qaiser Social Sciences Grand Asian University Sialkot PhD 1279 Dr. Ayaz Ullah Information Technology University of Swabi PhD 1280 Dr. Ayesha Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1281 Dr. Ayesha Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1282 Ms. Ayesha Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore MPhil 1283 Ms. Ayesha Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 1284 Dr. Ayesha Nazuk Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1285 Dr. Ayesha Abbas Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1286 Dr. AYESHA ABBASI Engineering Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1287 Dr. Ayesha Abrar Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1288 Dr. Ayesha Afzal Information Technology Air University (Multan Campus) PhD 1289 Dr. Ayesha Aihetasham Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1290 ayesha ajaz 1291 Dr. Ayesha Altaf Information Technology University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1292 Dr. Ayesha Amir Siddiqi Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1293 Dr. Ayesha Ashfaq Information Technology University of the Punjab PhD 1294 Dr. Ayesha Atta Information Technology Government College University PhD 1295 Dr. Ayesha Baig Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1296 Dr. Ayesha Batool Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1297 Dr. Ayesha Butt Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1298 Dr. Ayesha Chaudhry Social Sciences Government College University PhD 1299 Dr. Ayesha Fahim Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1300 Dr. Ayesha Fahim Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1301 Dr. Ayesha Habib Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1302 Dr. Ayesha Haider Ali Engineering Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1303 Dr. Ayesha Iftikhar Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 1304 Dr. Ayesha Iftikhar Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1305 Dr. Ayesha Imtiaz Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1306 Ayesha Ishtiaq 1307 Dr. Ayesha Khan Information Technology University of Management & Technology PhD 1308 Dr. Ayesha Maqbool Biological Sciences Virtual University of Pakistan PhD 1309 Dr. Ayesha Mohyuddin Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1310 ayesha muniba 1311 Dr. Ayesha Murtaza Agricultural Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 1312 Dr. Ayesha Nazish Butt Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 1313 Dr. Ayesha Qurrat ul Ain Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1314 Dr. Ayesha Rafiq Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Space Technology PhD 1315 Dr. Ayesha Saddiqua Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 1316 Dr. Ayesha Samreen Multidisciplinary University of Peshawar PhD 1317 Dr. Ayesha Serfraz Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1318 Ms. Ayesha Shafqat Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 1319 Dr. Ayesha Siddiqa Information Technology University of Wah PhD 1320 Dr. Ayesha Zafar Health Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology MPhil 1321 Dr. Ayoub Rashid Chaudhary Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 1322 Dr. Aysha Almas Health Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 1323 Dr. Aysha Bibi Mathematics & Statistics Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 1324 Aysha Safdar 1325 Dr. Ayub Elahi Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1326 Dr. Ayub Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 1327 Dr. Ayub Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 1328 Dr. Ayyaz Ali Engineering Sciences Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 1329 Prof. Ayyaz Ali Khan Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1330 Prof. Ayyaz Ali Khan Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1331 Dr. Azam Chaudhry Social Sciences Lahore School of Economics PhD 1332 Dr. Azam Hayat Biological Sciences Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 1333 Dr. Azam Khan Mathematics & Statistics NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1334 Dr. Azam Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1335 Dr. Azeem Mir Physics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1336 Dr. Azeem Mushtaq Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1337 Azfar Ghani 1338 Dr. Azhar Ali Haidry Physics University of Okara PhD 1339 Dr. Azhar Ali Zafar Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 1340 Dr. Azhar Hussain Physics Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 1341 Dr. Azhar Hussain Biological Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 1342 Dr. Azhar Hussain Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 1343 Dr. Azhar Hussain Mathematics & Statistics University of Sargodha PhD 1344 Dr. Azhar Hussain Shah Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 1345 Dr. Azhar Imran Mudassir Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 1346 Dr. Azhar Iqbal Chemical Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 1347 Azhar Iqbal 1348 Dr. Azhar Iqbal Kashif Butt Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 1349 Dr. Azhar Mahmood Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1350 Dr. Azhar Mahmood Chemical Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1351 Dr. Azhar Pervaiz Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 1352 Dr. Azhar Rasul Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 1353 Dr. Azhar Rauf Information Technology University of Peshawar PhD 1354 Dr. Aziz Ud Din Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 1355 Dr. Aziz Ahmad Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 1356 Dr. Aziz Ahmed Ujjan Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 1357 Dr. Aziz Mithani Biological Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 1358 Dr. Aziz Rehman Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 1359 Dr. Aziz Ullah Chemical Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 1360 Dr. Aziz Ullah Jan Social Sciences University of Chitral PhD 1361 Dr. Aziz ur Rehman Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 1362 Dr. Aziz ur Rahman Muhammad Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1363 Dr. Aziz Ur Rehman Hafiz Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1364 Dr. Azizuddin Shaikh Chemical Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology is listed as Federal Urdu University of Arts PhD 1365 Dr. Azka Amin Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 1366 Dr. Azka Khan Social Sciences Rawalpindi Women University PhD 1367 Dr. Azmat Hussain Engineering Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1368 Dr. Azmat Ullah Social Sciences Government College University PhD 1369 Dr. Azmat Ullah Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 1370 Dr. Azmat Ullah Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1371 Dr. Azmat Ullah Khan Niazi Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 1372 Dr. Azmat Ullah Khan Niazi Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1373 Mr. Azmatullah Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Azam Medical College MPhil 1374 Dr. Azmatullah Khan Sherani Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1375 Dr. Azra Fanoos Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1376 Dr. Azra Mehmood Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1377 Dr. Azra Riaz Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1378 Dr. Babak Mahmood Social Sciences Government College University PhD 1379 Dr. Babar Ali Qureshi Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1380 Dr. Babar Aziz Social Sciences Government College University PhD 1381 Dr. Babar Hussain Shah Information Technology Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 1382 Dr. Babar Mansoor Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1383 Dr. Babar Shahbaz Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1384 Prof. Babar Tasneem Shaikh Health Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 1385 Dr. Bahadar Nawab Khattak Social Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1386 Bahjat Tariq 1387 Dr. Bakhat Ali Chemical Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 1388 Dr. Bakhtiar Ali Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1389 Dr. Bakhtiar Khan Kasi Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1390 Dr. Balach Rasheed Social Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 1391 Dr. Banat Gul Physics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1392 Dr. Banzeer Ahsan Abbasi Biological Sciences Rawalpindi Women University PhD 1393 Dr. Baradi Waryani Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 1394 Dr. Barkat Ullah Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1395 Dr. Barkat Ullah Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 1396 Dr. Basharat Ali Agricultural Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 1397 Dr. Basharat Hussain Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1398 Dr. Basharat Raza Social Sciences National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 1399 Dr. Basheer Ahmed Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1400 Dr. Bashir Ahmad Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 1401 Dr. Bashir Ahmad Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 1402 Dr. Bashir Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1403 Dr. Bashir Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 1404 Dr. Bashir Ahmed Memon Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1405 Dr. Basit Niaz Chemical Sciences Hazara University PhD 1406 Dr. Basit Ali Mathematics & Statistics University of Management & Technology PhD 1407 Dr. Basit Raza Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1408 Dr. Basit Shafiq Engineering Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 1409 Dr. Basit Shahzad Engineering Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 1410 Dr. Batool Fatima Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1411 Beenish 1412 Dr. Beenish Ayesha Akram Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1413 Beenish Malik 1414 Dr. Beenish Malik Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1415 Dr. Beenish Shahid Biological Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 1416 Dr. Beenish Tariq Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration PhD 1417 Dr. Beenish Zahid Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1418 Dr. Behisht Ara Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1419 Mr. Behram Zulfiqar Social Sciences University of Lahore Masters 1420 Mr. Behram Zulfiqar Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) Masters 1421 Dr. Behramand Chemical Sciences The Islamia College PhD 1422 Dr. Behzad Anwar Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 1423 Dr. Behzad Murtaza Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 1424 Dr. Benash Sarwar Health Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1425 Dr. Benish Amin Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 1426 Dr. Bhagwan Das Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1427 Dr. Bhawani Shankar Chowdhry Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1428 Ms. Bibi Ainy (Ainy Rehman) Information Technology IndusUniversity Masters 1429 Dr. Bibi Kulsoom Health Sciences Bahria University PhD 1430 Dr. Bibi Saima Zeb Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1431 Dr. Bilal Ahmed Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1432 Dr. Bilal Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 1433 Dr. Bilal Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics University of Wah PhD 1434 Dr. Bilal Ahmad Agricultural Sciences University of Swat PhD 1435 Bilal Ahmad 1436 Dr. Bilal Ahmad Khan Chemical Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 1437 Dr. Bilal Ahmed Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 1438 Dr. Bilal Ahmed Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1439 Dr. Bilal Ahmed Memon Social Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 1440 Dr. Bilal Ahmed Usmani Health Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1441 Dr. Bilal Akbar Chuddher Engineering Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 1442 Dr. Bilal Aslam Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 1443 Dr. Bilal Aslam Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1444 Dr. Bilal Bin Saeed Social Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1445 Dr. Bilal Haider Abbasi Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 1446 Dr. Bilal Ijaz Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1447 Dr. Bilal Javid Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University MPhil 1448 Dr. Bilal Khan Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 1449 Dr. Bilal Latif Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 1450 Dr. Bilal Mirza Social Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 1451 Mr. Bilal Muhammad Ismail Memon Engineering Sciences IndusUniversity MPhil 1452 Dr. Bilal Muhammad Khan Engineering Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1453 Dr. Bilal Muhammad Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1454 Dr. Bilal Ramzan Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 1455 Dr. Bilal Saeed Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1456 Dr. Bilal Saeed Khan Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1457 Dr. Bilal Sarwar Social Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1458 Dr. Bilal Shams Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1459 Dr. Bilal Zahid Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1460 Mr. BILAWAL ALI Chemical Sciences University of Sindh MPhil 1461 Dr. Bilawal Rehman Engineering Sciences National Skills University PhD 1462 Bilqees Bano 1463 Dr. Bilqees Fatima Engineering Sciences Minhaj University PhD 1464 Dr. Bilqees Ghani Bano Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 1465 Dr. Bilquees Fatima Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1466 Dr. Bilquees Gul Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1467 Dr. Binafsha Manzoor Syed Health Sciences Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences PhD 1468 Dr. Bisharat Rasool Memon Information Technology University of Sindh PhD 1469 Dr. Bisma Rauff Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1470 Dr. Bisma Rauff Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1471 Dr. Bisma Riaz Biological Sciences University of Okara PhD 1472 Dr. Brian Gagosh Nayyar Biological Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 1473 Dr. Bulbul Jan Mathematics & Statistics Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1474 Dr. Burhan Ullah Physics The Islamia College PhD 1475 Dr. Bushra Akhtar Chemical Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1476 Dr. Bushra Allah Rakha Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1477 Dr. Bushra Amin Biological Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 1478 Dr. Bushra Bibi Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 1479 Dr. Bushra Bilal Chemical Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 1480 Dr. Bushra Hafeez Kiani Biological Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1481 Dr. Bushra Hassan Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1482 Dr. Bushra Hina Chemical Sciences PhD 1483 Dr. Bushra Ijaz Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1484 Dr. Bushra Ismail Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1485 Mrs. Bushra Karim Mirza Social Sciences Air University MPhil 1486 Dr. Bushra Khan Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1487 Dr. Bushra Majeed Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1488 Dr. Bushra Mirza Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 1489 Dr. Bushra Naeem Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1490 Dr. Bushra Naoreen Social Sciences Government College University PhD 1491 Dr. Bushra Naqvi Social Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 1492 Dr. Bushra Naseem Bajwa Chemical Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1493 Dr. Bushra Nasir Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1494 Dr. Bushra Naz Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1495 Dr. Bushra Niaz Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 1496 Dr. Bushra Parveen Physics Lahore Garrison University PhD 1497 Dr. Bushra Sarwar Social Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 1498 Dr. Bushra Shamshad Chemical Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 1499 Dr. Bushra Tabassum Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1500 Dr. Bushra Yasmeen Social Sciences Lahore Leads University PhD 1501 Dr. Bushra Yasmin Social Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 1502 Case@b17 1503 Dr. Chaman Ara Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1504 Dr. Chand Raza Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 1505 Dr. Chanda Naseem Health Sciences The Superior College PhD 1506 Dr. Chaudhry Arshad Mehmood Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1507 Dr. Chaudhry Muhamad Nadeem Faisal Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 1508 Dr. Chaudhry Zahid Mukhtar Biological Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 1509 Dr. Choudhry Fahad Azim Engineering Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 1510 Cotton123 1511 Dr. Danish Ahmed Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 1512 Dr. Danish Ahmed Siddiqui Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1513 Dr. Danish Hassan Mathematics & Statistics National Textile University PhD 1514 Dr. Danish Junaid Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 1515 Dr. Danish Khan Engineering Sciences IndusUniversity PhD 1516 Dr. Danish Mahmood Engineering Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 1517 Dr. Danish Mahmood Baitab Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 1518 Dr. Dawar Khan Information Technology University of Haripur PhD 1519 Dr. Dawood Nawaz Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 1520 Dr. Deeba Afzal Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 1521 Dr. Deeba Afzal Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1522 Dr. Deeba Amraiz Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 1523 Dr. Deedar Ali Jamro Physics Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 1524 Dr. Deedar Nabi Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1525 Dr. Dhani Bux Talpur Information Technology Jinnah University for Women PhD 1526 Dr. Dil Nawaz Hakro Information Technology University of Sindh PhD 1527 Dr. Dil Nawaz Khan Mathematics & Statistics Islamia University PhD 1528 Dr. Dilawar Ali Physics Government College University PhD 1529 Dr. Dilawar Hussain Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1530 Dr. Dilawar Hussain Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1531 Dr. Dilawar Khan Health Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1532 Dr. Dilawar Khan Durrani Social Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 1533 Dr. Dildar Ahmed Chemical Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 1534 Dr. Dilshad Ahmed Khan Chemical Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 1535 Dr. Dilshad Hussain Chemical Sciences HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry PhD 1536 Ms. Dimpal Kumari Social Sciences University of Wah MPhil 1537 Mr. Diyar Ahmad Biological Sciences HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry MPhil 1538 Dr. Dost Muhammad Khan Information Technology Islamia University PhD 1539 Dr. Dost Muhammad Khan Mathematics & Statistics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1540 Dr Aamna Habib 1541 Dr Ahad Mehmood 1542 Dr. Dr Aisha Khalid Biological Sciences Lahore Garrison University PhD 1543 Dr Ata Ur Rehman 1544 Dr. Dr Dildar Hussain Kalhoro Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1545 Prof. Dr Fahim Hashmi Engineering Sciences Government of Pakistan (GoP), Islamabad, Pakistan PhD 1546 Dr. Dr Hasnain Abbas Naqvi Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1547 Dr. Dr Hasnain Abbas Naqvi Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1548 Dr. Dr Irfana Liaqat Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 1549 Dr. Dr Israr khan Health Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 1550 Dr. Dr Izza Ayub; PT Health Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 1551 Dr. Dr Lieza Iftikhar Health Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 1552 Dr. Dr Mahmooda Buriro Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1553 Dr Mahvish Musharraf Randhawa 1554 Dr. Dr Memuna Ghafoor Shahid Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 1555 Dr. Dr Muhammad Abdul Qadir Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 1556 Dr. Dr Muhammad Ali Abid Information Technology The University of Agriculture PhD 1557 Dr. Dr Muhammad Hanif Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 1558 Dr Muhammad Iftikhar 1559 Dr Muhammad Tashfeen Aslam 1560 Prof. Dr Muhammad Zubair Khan Mathematics & Statistics Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 1561 Dr Muhammad Zulkifl Hasan 1562 Dr. Dr Noor Hussain Shar Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 1563 DR NOOR SAMAD GANDAHI 1564 Dr. Dr Rizwan Rasheed Environmental Sciences Government College University PhD 1565 Dr Saadat Majeed 1566 Dr Saba Ibrahim 1567 Dr Sadia Aslam 1568 Dr Samia Rehman Dogar 1569 Dr. Dr Shahid Iqbal Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1570 Dr. Dr Shahnaz bibi Biological Sciences College Education Department PhD 1571 Dr Shoaib Ahmed 1572 Dr. Dr Sundas Batool Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 1573 Dr Suraiya Khatoon 1574 Dr. Dr Syed Zulfiqar Physics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1575 Dr Syeda Sumra Naqvi 1576 Dr Waris Ali 1577 Dr. Dr Zahida Aziz Sial Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1578 Dr. Dr Zubair Ahmed Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1579 Dr. Abdul Fatah Soomro 1580 Dr. Dr. Abdul Karim Shah Chemical Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1581 Dr. Dr. Abdul Qadir Social Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 1582 Dr. Dr. Abdul Rauf Physics Directorate of Civil Defence PhD 1583 Dr. Dr. Abdullah Lakhan Information Technology Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1584 Dr. Ahmad Raza Ashraf 1585 Dr. Allah Ditta 1586 Dr. Altaf ur Rehman 1587 Dr. Dr. Aneeqa Saleem Health Sciences Minhaj University PhD 1588 Dr. Arqam Javed Kayani 1589 Dr. Arsalan Ansari 1590 Dr. Asma Shabbir 1591 Dr. Ateeq-ur-Rehman 1592 Dr. Bushra Irum 1593 Prof. Dr. Engr. Ahmed Muddassir Khan Information Technology IndusUniversity PhD 1594 Dr. Dr. Faheem Jan Health Sciences Ministry of Health PhD 1595 Dr. Farhat Yasmeen 1596 Dr. Fawwad Ahmad 1597 Prof. Dr. Gul Majid Khan Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 1598 Dr. Dr. Hasina Baloch Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1599 Dr. Dr. Hira Ijaz Multidisciplinary Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 1600 Dr. Huma Qureshi 1601 Dr. Ihsan ul Haq 1602 Dr. Ijaz Ashraf 1603 Prof. Dr. Iyad Naeem Muhammad Health Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1604 Dr. Dr. Jawaid Ahmed Khokhar Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 1605 Dr. Kalsoom Akhtar 1606 Dr. Kishwar Sultana 1607 Dr. Dr. Malik Muhammad Hashim Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 1608 Ms. Dr. Maria Kaleem Earth Sciences University of Karachi PhD 1609 Dr. Marriam Daud 1610 Dr. Misbah Aslam 1611 Dr. Muhammad Ahsan Khan 1612 Dr. Dr. Muhammad Ali Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 1613 Dr. Muhammad Ali Brohi 1614 Dr. Dr. Muhammad Amjad Nadim Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 1615 Dr. Muhammad Idrees 1616 Prof. Dr. Muhammad Khaleeq-ur-Rehman Physics University of Sialkot PhD 1617 Prof. Dr. Muhammad Mukhtar Biological Sciences Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 1618 Dr. Dr. Muhammad Nadeem Ashraf Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1619 Dr. Muhammad Qamar Tusief 1620 Dr. Dr. Muhammad Riaz Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 1621 Dr. Muhammad Rizwan 1622 Dr. Muhammad Saeed 1623 Dr. Dr. Muhammad Saleem Physics Islamia University PhD 1624 Dr. Dr. Muhammad Shahzad Mathematics & Statistics University of Haripur PhD 1625 Dr. Muhammad Usman Ahmad 1626 Dr. Dr. Muhammad Yaqoob Koondhar Information Technology Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1627 Dr. Dr. Muhammad Zafar Saleem Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1628 Dr. Nadeem Anjum 1629 Dr. Dr. Nadir Hussain Bhayo Social Sciences The Shaikh Ayaz University PhD 1630 Dr. Dr. Naveed Anwer Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1631 Dr. Dr. Naveed Anwer Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1632 Dr. Neelofar 1633 Dr. Pervaiz Ali Channar 1634 Dr. Rabia Iftikhar 1635 Dr. Ramala Masood Ahmad 1636 Prof. Dr. Riaz Ahmed Shaikh Information Technology Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 1637 Dr. Dr. Rizwan Ali Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1638 Dr. Dr. Rizwan Ali Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1639 Dr. Rizwana Sabri 1640 Dr. Dr. Sabeen Masood Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 1641 Dr. Safdar Ali 1642 Dr. Sajida Karim 1643 Dr. Dr. Sajjad Ahmad Khan Mathematics & Statistics The Islamia College PhD 1644 Dr. Saman Javed 1645 Dr. Dr. Shahid Bashir Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1646 Dr. Dr. Shahid Bashir Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1647 Dr. Shanawer Niaz 1648 Dr. Dr. Shariq Hussain Information Technology Foundation University PhD 1649 Dr. Siddra Rana 1650 Prof. Dr. Somia Gul Health Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 1651 Dr. Dr. Sourath Abdul Qayoom Mahar Social Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 1652 Prof. Dr. Syed Waqas Hassan Biological Sciences University of Wah PhD 1653 DR. TAUSEEF ANWAR 1654 Dr. Tooba Mehfooz 1655 Dr. Umair Gull 1656 Dr. Umair Rais Uddin 1657 Dr. Wajid Ali Jatoi 1658 Dr. Zeeshan Ali Memon 1659 Ms. Dr.Asma Batool Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 1660 Dr. Dr.Engr.Nadia Mustaqim Ansari Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1661 Dr. Dr.Hina Fazal Biological Sciences Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR) PhD 1662 Dr. Dr.Mujtaba Ellahi Mahar Chemical Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1663 Prof. Dr.Sirajul Haq Kandhro Multidisciplinary University of Sindh PhD 1664 Dr.Zainab Makhdum 1665 Dr. Dur e Jabeen Engineering Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1666 Dr. Dur e Shehwar Sagheer Mathematics & Statistics Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 1667 Dr. Durdana Health Sciences Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University PhD 1668 Dr. Durdana Qaiser Gillani Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1669 Dr. Durdana Qaiser Gillani Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1670 Dr. Dure Najaf Iqbal Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1671 Dr. Dure Najaf Iqbal Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1672 Dr. Durri Shahwar Agricultural Sciences University of Swabi PhD 1673 Education2025*# 1674 Prof. Eesha Yaqoob Health Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 1675 Dr. Ehnber Naheed Maraj Mathematics & Statistics National Skills University PhD 1676 Dr. Ehsan Adeeb Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 1677 Dr. Ehsan Ali Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 1678 Dr. Ehsan Ali Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 1679 Dr. Ehsan Ul Haq Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1680 Dr. Ehsan Ullah Munir Information Technology COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 1681 Dr. Ehtasham Mustafa Engineering Sciences Gomal University PhD 1682 Dr. Ehtesham Zahoor Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 1683 Dr. Ehtsham Azhar Mathematics & Statistics Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1684 Dr. Eid Rehman Information Technology Foundation University PhD 1685 Dr. Ejaz Ahmad Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1686 Dr. Ejaz Ali Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1687 Dr. Ejaz Ashraf Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 1688 Dr. Ejaz Aslam Social Sciences Minhaj University PhD 1689 Dr. Ejaz Hussain Chemical Sciences Islamia University PhD 1690 Dr. Ejaz Mahmood Ahmad Qureshi Environmental Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1691 Dr. Ejaz Mahmood Ahmad Qureshi Environmental Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1692 Dr. Ejaz Mohiuddin Health Sciences Hamdard University PhD 1693 Dr. Ejaz Ullah Cheema Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1694 Dr. Emad Uddin Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1695 Engr. Dr. Fouzia Gillani 1696 Dr. Engr. Muhamad Ishfaq Khan Engineering Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1697 Mr. Engr. Sayed Mazhar Ali Shah Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology MPhil 1698 Mr. Engr. Zaheer Ahmed Khan Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University Masters 1699 Dr. Eraj Humayun Mirza Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1700 Dr. Erum Akbar Hussain Chemical Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1701 Dr. Erum Dilshad Biological Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 1702 Dr. Erum Hafeez Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 1703 Dr. Erum Irshad Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1704 Dr. Erum Ishaq Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 1705 Dr. Erum Jabeen Chemical Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 1706 Dr. Erum Pervaiz Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1707 Dr. Erum Shaikh Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 1708 Dr. Erum Zahid Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Space Technology PhD 1709 Dr. Ezzat Khan Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 1710 Dr. Faaiz Ali Shah Health Sciences Lady Reading Hospital Peshawar MPhil 1711 Dr. Faaiz Ul Hassan Biological Sciences Higher Education Department PhD 1712 Dr. Faaz Ahmed Butt Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1713 Dr. Fadia Shah Information Technology Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 1714 Dr. Fahad Ahmad Information Technology Kinnaird College for Women PhD 1715 Dr. Fahad Ali Engineering Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1716 Dr. Fahad Ali Earth Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 1717 Dr. Fahad Jibran Health Sciences Shaheed Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto Medical University PhD 1718 Dr. Fahad Masoud Wattoo Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 1719 Dr. Fahad Mumtaz Malik Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1720 Dr. Fahad Munir Abbasi Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1721 Dr. Fahad Nazir Khoso Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 1722 Dr. Fahad Pervaiz Health Sciences Islamia University PhD 1723 Dr. Fahad Rasheed Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1724 Dr. Fahad Rehman Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1725 Dr. Fahad Saleem Health Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 1726 Dr. Fahad Sarfraz Butt Engineering Sciences HITEC University PhD 1727 Dr. Fahad Shafiq Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1728 Dr. Fahad Shafiq Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1729 Dr. Fahad Sherwani Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 1730 Dr. Fahd Rasul Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1731 Dr. Fahed Parvaiz Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1732 Dr. Faheem Ahmed Khan Biological Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 1733 Dr. Faheem Ahmed Khan Biological Sciences University of Okara PhD 1734 Dr. Faheem Akhtar Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 1735 Dr. Faheem Akhter Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 1736 Dr. Faheem Akhter Social Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1737 Dr. Faheem Ali Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1738 Dr. Faheem Butt Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1739 Dr. Faheem Gul Gilal Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 1740 Dr. Faheem Hadi Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 1741 Faheem Hassan Akhtar 1742 Dr. Faheem Khurshied Butt Physics University of Education PhD 1743 Dr. Faheem Ullah Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 1744 Dr. Faheemullah Shaikh Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1745 Dr. Fahim Ahmed Physics University of Education PhD 1746 Dr. Fahim Ahmed Ibupoto Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 1747 Dr. Fahim Arif Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1748 Dr. Fahim Gohar Awan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1749 Dr. Fahim Nawaz Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 1750 Mr. Fahim Shahzad Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology Masters 1751 Dr. Fahim Uddin Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1752 Dr. Fahim Ullah Khan Agricultural Sciences Hazara University PhD 1753 Dr. Fahim Ullah Khan Chemical Sciences Abasyn University PhD 1754 Dr. Fahmida Jabeen Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1755 Dr. Faid Gul Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 1756 Dr. Faiqa Kiran Social Sciences Government College University PhD 1757 Dr. Faiqah Ramzan Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 1758 Dr. Faisal Ali Mathematics & Statistics Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1759 Dr. Faisal Ahmed Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1760 Dr. Faisal Ahmed Memon Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1761 Dr. Faisal Akram Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1762 Dr. Faisal Bashir Hussain Information Technology Bahria University PhD 1763 Dr. Faisal Bukhari Information Technology University of the Punjab PhD 1764 Dr. Faisal Gulzar Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1765 Dr. Faisal Gulzar Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1766 Dr. Faisal Hussain Biological Sciences Ghazi University PhD 1767 Dr. Faisal Hussnain Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1768 Dr. Faisal Hyder Shah Syed Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 1769 Dr. Faisal Iqbal Physics Islamia University PhD 1770 Dr. Faisal Jamil Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1771 Dr. Faisal Kamiran Information Technology Information Technology University of the Punjab PhD 1772 Dr. Faisal Karim Shaikh Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1773 Dr. Faisal Khan Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1774 Dr. Faisal Khan Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1775 Dr. Faisal Mahmood Social Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 1776 Dr. Faisal Maqbool Zahid Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 1777 Dr. Faisal Mustafa Social Sciences Qarshi University PhD 1778 Dr. Faisal Nawaz Chemical Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1779 Dr. Faisal Nawaz Chemical Sciences University of Wah PhD 1780 Dr. Faisal Nawaz Social Sciences COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 1781 Dr. Faisal Nouroz Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 1782 Dr. Faisal Rafique Physics University of Karachi PhD 1783 Dr. Faisal Rehman Information Technology COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1784 Dr. Faisal Rehman Earth Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 1785 Dr. Faisal Rehman Earth Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 1786 Dr. Faisal Saeed Agricultural Sciences National Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology PhD 1787 Dr. Faisal Saleem Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1788 Dr. Faisal Shabbir Earth Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1789 Dr. Faisal Shahzad Engineering Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 1790 Dr. Faisal Shahzad Social Sciences COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 1791 Dr. Faisal Siddique Biological Sciences Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences PhD 1792 Dr. Faisal Usman Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1793 Dr. Faiz Ahmad Joyia Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1794 Dr. Faiz Ahmed Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 1795 Dr. Faiz Ali Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 1796 Dr. Faiz Muhammad Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Swat PhD 1797 Dr. Faiz Rabbani Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 1798 Dr. Faiz ul Hassan Shah Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 1799 Dr. Faiza Abdur Rab Multidisciplinary University of Karachi PhD 1800 Dr. Faiza Anjum Physics Government College for Women University PhD 1801 Dr. Faiza Asghar Chemical Sciences University of Wah PhD 1802 Dr. Faiza Ashfaq Agricultural Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 1803 Ms. Faiza Bukhari Engineering Sciences University of Wah Bachelors 1804 Dr. Faiza Iqbal Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1805 Faiza Irfan 1806 Dr. Faiza Latif Information Technology Lahore College for Women University PhD 1807 Faiza Makhdoom 1808 Dr. Faiza Nazir Chemical Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 1809 Faiza Rao 1810 Dr. Faiza Saleem Social Sciences University of Wah PhD 1811 Dr. Faiza Saleem Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1812 Dr. Faiza Sharif Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1813 Dr. Faiza Zeeshan Health Sciences Sindh Medical College MPhil 1814 Dr. Faizan Ahmad Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1815 Dr. Faizan Dastgeer Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1816 Dr. Faizan Raza Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1817 Dr. Faizan ur Rehman Qaiser Earth Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1818 Dr. Faizullah Jan Information Technology University of Peshawar PhD 1819 Dr. Fakhar Bilal Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 1820 Dr. Fakhar Shahzad Social Sciences ILMA University PhD 1821 Dr. Fakhar un Nisa Yunus Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1822 Dr. Fakhr E Alam Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1823 Dr. Fakhr ul Islam Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 1824 Dr. Fakhra Aziz Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1825 Dr. Fakhre Alam Information Technology University of Malakand PhD 1826 Dr. Fakhri Alam Khan Information Technology Institute of Management Sciences PhD 1827 Dr. Fakhrud Din Information Technology University of Malakand PhD 1828 Dr. Fakhsheena Anjum Chemical Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 1829 Dr. Falak Sher Chemical Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 1830 Dr. Falak Zeb Health Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 1831 Dr. Falik Shear Social Sciences National Textile University PhD 1832 Dr. Faqeer Muhammad Social Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 1833 Dr. Faqiha Sultan Mathematics & Statistics NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1834 Dr. Faqir Muhammad Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1835 Dr. Farah Ali Warraich Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 1836 Dr. Farah Asad Health Sciences PhD 1837 Dr. Farah Deeba Engineering Sciences Hamdard University PhD 1838 Dr. Farah Deeba Biological Sciences The Women University PhD 1839 Dr. Farah Deeba Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1840 Farah Irfan 1841 Dr. Farah Karim Information Technology Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 1842 Farah Khan 1843 Dr. Farah Kishwar Chemical Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 1844 Dr. Farah Naz Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1845 Dr. Farah Rauf Shakoori Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1846 Dr. Farah Saeed Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 1847 Dr. Farah Samreen Social Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1848 Dr. Farah Shireen Ali Shah Biological Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 1849 Dr. Farah Tariq Biological Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 1850 Dr. Faraha Ashraf Mathematics & Statistics Minhaj University PhD 1851 Dr. Faran Awais Butt Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1852 Dr. Farasat Ali Shah Bukhari Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1853 Dr. Faraz Ahmed Kunwar Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1854 Dr. Faraz Akram Engineering Sciences Riphah International University PhD 1855 Dr. Faraz Akrim Biological Sciences University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 1856 Dr. Faraz Junejo Engineering Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 1857 Dr. Faraz Mehmood Mathematics & Statistics Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1858 Dr. Fareed Hussain Mangi Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 1859 Dr. Fareeha Akhtar Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1860 Dr. Fareeha Ambreen Biological Sciences Rawalpindi Women University PhD 1861 Dr. Fareeha Javed Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1862 Dr. Fareesa Malik Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1863 Dr. Farha Masood Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1864 Dr. Farhan Aadil Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 1865 Dr. Farhan Anwar Khan Biological Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 1866 Dr. Farhan Hafeez Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1867 Dr. Farhan Haq Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1868 Dr. Farhan Hussain Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1869 Farhan Khalid 1870 Dr. Farhan Khan Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 1871 Dr. Farhan Khan Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 1872 Dr. Farhan Masud Information Technology University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1873 Dr. Farhan Navid Yousaf Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1874 Dr. Farhan Riaz Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1875 Dr. Farhan Saeed Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 1876 Dr. Farhan Saeed Vakani Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 1877 Dr. Farhan Sarwar Social Sciences University of Education PhD 1878 Dr. Farhan Siddiqi Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 1879 Dr. Farhana Bibi Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 1880 Dr. Farhana Jabeen Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1881 Dr. Farhana Nosheen Social Sciences Government College University PhD 1882 Dr. Farhana Umer Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 1883 Dr. Farhat Bano Biological Sciences University of Health Sciences PhD 1884 Dr. Farhat Iqbal Mathematics & Statistics University of Balochistan PhD 1885 Dr. Farhat Jabeen Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 1886 Dr. Farhat Jamil Social Sciences Beaconhouse National University PhD 1887 Dr. Farhat Jubeen Chemical Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 1888 Dr. Farhat Munir Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1889 Dr. Farhat Naseem Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 1890 Dr. Farhat Rasul Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1891 Dr. Farhat Safdar Mathematics & Statistics Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 1892 Dr. Farhat Ullah Social Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 1893 Dr. Farhat Ullah Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 1894 Dr. Farhat Ullah Khan Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 1895 Dr. Farheen Aslam Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1896 Dr. Farhina Hameed Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 1897 Faria Khurshid 1898 Dr. Farid Ullah Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 1899 Dr. Farid Ullah Social Sciences Iqra National University PhD 1900 Dr. Farida Behlil Chemical Sciences Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 1901 Dr. Fariha Arooj Environmental Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1902 Dr. Fariha Aslam Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1903 Dr. Fariha Gul Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1904 Dr. Fariha Latif Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1905 Dr. Fariha Tariq Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1906 Farishta 1907 Farkhanda Ghafoor 1908 Dr. FARKHANDA MANZOOR Agricultural Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1909 Dr. Farkhanda Tabassum Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 1910 Dr. Farkhunda Nadeem Health Sciences Isra University, Hyderabad PhD 1911 Dr. Farkhunda Rasheed Choudhary Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 1912 Dr. Farman Afzal Social Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1913 Dr. Farman Ali Engineering Sciences Qurtaba University of Science & Information Technology PhD 1914 Dr. Farman Ali Social Sciences Iqra National University PhD 1915 Dr. Farman Ali Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1916 Dr. Farman Ali Agricultural Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1917 Dr. Farman Ali Khan Chemical Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 1918 Dr. Farman Ali Mangi Physics Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 1919 Dr. Farman Ullah Biological Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 1920 Dr. Faroha Liaqat Chemical Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 1921 Dr. Farooq Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1922 Dr. Farooq Ahmad Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1923 Dr. Farooq Ahmad Tahir Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1924 Dr. Farooq Ahmed Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1925 Dr. Farooq Anwar Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1926 Dr. Farooq Anwar Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1927 Dr. Farooq Anwar Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 1928 Dr. Farooq Azam Chemical Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 1929 Dr. Farooq Aziz Physics University of Sahiwal PhD 1930 Dr. Farooq Hassan Social Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1931 Dr. Farooq Hussain Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1932 Dr. Farooq Jan Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1933 Dr. Farooq Saleem Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1934 Dr. Farooq Saleem Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1935 Dr. Farooque Azam Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1936 Dr. Farooque Hassan Kumbhar Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 1937 Dr. Farrah Ashraf Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 1938 Dr. Farrah Ashraf Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1939 Dr. Farrakh Mehboob Biological Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 1940 Dr. Farrukh Arif Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1941 Dr. Farrukh Arsalan Siddiqui Engineering Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1942 Dr. Farrukh Azeem Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 1943 Dr. Farrukh Jamal Mathematics & Statistics Islamia University PhD 1944 Dr. Farrukh Mahmood Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 1945 Mr. Farrukh Mehmood Health Sciences Riphah International University MPhil 1946 Dr. Farrukh Shahzad Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 1947 Dr. Farrukh Zeeshan Khan Information Technology University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1948 Dr. Farukh Noor Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 1949 Dr. Faryal Ahmed Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 1950 Dr. Faryal Chaudhry Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 1951 Dr. Faryal Chaudhry Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1952 Dr. Faryal Idrees Physics University of the Punjab PhD 1953 Dr. Faryal Mehwish Awan Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1954 Dr. Faryal Mehwish Awan Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1955 Dr. Faryal Raheem Social Sciences Abasyn University PhD 1956 Dr. Faryal Salman Social Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 1957 Dr. Farzan Yahya Social Sciences Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 1958 Dr. Farzana Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 1959 Dr. Farzana Abbas Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 1960 Dr. Farzana Abbasi Biological Sciences Isra University, Hyderabad PhD 1961 Dr. Farzana Ashraf Social Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 1962 Dr. Farzana Kulsoom Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 1963 Dr. Farzana Masroor Social Sciences Air University PhD 1964 Dr. Farzana Naheed Khan Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 1965 Dr. Farzana Naz Chemical Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 1966 Dr. Farzana Rashid Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 1967 Dr. Farzana Shaheen Chemical Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 1968 Dr. Farzana Siddique Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 1969 Dr. Farzeen Tanwir Health Sciences Bahria University PhD 1970 Dr. Fasee Ullah Information Technology Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 1971 Dr. Fasih Ahmed Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 1972 Dr. Fatima Abrar Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 1973 Dr. Fatima Abrar Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 1974 Dr. Fatima Ahsan Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 1975 Dr. Fatima Anjum Information Technology Lahore College for Women University PhD 1976 Dr. Fatima Batool Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1977 Dr. Fatima Farooq Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 1978 Dr. Fatima Javed Chemical Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 1979 Dr. Fatima Kamran Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1980 Dr. Fatima Khitab Chemical Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 1981 Dr. Fatima Khurram Bukhari Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 1982 Dr. Fatima Rasool Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 1983 Dr. Fatima Rehan Dar Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 1984 Dr. Fatima Rizvi Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 1985 Fatima Sarwar 1986 Dr. Fatima Waqi Sajjad Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1987 Dr. Fatiqa Zafar Chemical Sciences University of Sahiwal PhD 1988 Dr. Fauzia Iqbal Physics University of the Punjab PhD 1989 Dr. Fauzia Janjua Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 1990 Dr. Fauzia Mubarik Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 1991 Dr. Fauzia Naheed Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 1992 Dr. Fauziah Rabbani Health Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 1993 Dr. Fawad Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Wah PhD 1994 Dr. Fawad Ahmad Social Sciences Iqra National University PhD 1995 Mr. Fawad Ahmed Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University MPhil 1996 Dr. Fawad Ahmed Najam Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 1997 Dr. Fawad Baig Social Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 1998 Dr. Fawad Hussain Social Sciences National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 1999 Dr. Fawad Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2000 Dr. Fawad Khan Physics Gomal University PhD 2001 Dr. Fawad Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Peshawar PhD 2002 Dr. Fawad Naseer Engineering Sciences Beaconhouse National University PhD 2003 Dr. Fawad Qayum Engineering Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2004 Fawad Sheikh 2005 Dr. Fayaz Ahmad Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2006 Dr. Fayaz Ali Shah Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 2007 Dr. Fayaz Hussain Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2008 Dr. Fayyaz Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics National Textile University PhD 2009 Dr. Fayyaz Ahmad Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2010 Dr. Fayyaz Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics University of Gujrat PhD 2011 Dr. Fayyaz Ahmad Faize Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2012 Dr. Fayyaz Rasool Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2013 Dr. Fazaila Sabih Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2014 Dr. Fazal Adnan Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2015 Dr. Fazal Akbar Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 2016 Dr. Fazal Ghani Mathematics & Statistics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2017 Dr. Fazal Hadi Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2018 Dr. Fazal Hadi Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2019 Dr. Fazal Hameed Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 2020 Dr. Fazal Jalal Agricultural Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2021 Dr. Fazal Jalil Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2022 Dr. Fazal Manzoor Arain Health Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 2023 Dr. Fazal Muhammad Engineering Sciences City University of Science and Information Technology PhD 2024 Dr. Fazal Munsif Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2025 Dr. Fazal Qudus Khan Engineering Sciences University of Swat PhD 2026 Dr. Fazal Rahim Chemical Sciences Hazara University PhD 2027 Dr. Fazal Rahim Khan Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 2028 Dr. Fazal Shahid Health Sciences Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University PhD 2029 Dr. Fazal Wahab Engineering Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 2030 Dr. Fazeel Abid Information Technology University of Management & Technology PhD 2031 Ms. Fazeela Zaka Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture MPhil 2032 Dr. Fazia Kausar Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2033 Dr. Fazia Kausar Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2034 Dr. Fazle Rabbi Chemical Sciences Abasyn University PhD 2035 Dr. Fazli Hussain Information Technology ILMA University PhD 2036 Dr. Fazli Rahim Biological Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 2037 Dr. Fazli Subhan Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 2038 Dr. Fazli Wadood Social Sciences University of Buner PhD 2039 Dr. Fazli Wahid Information Technology University of Haripur PhD 2040 Dr. Fazlul Haq Earth Sciences Government College University PhD 2041 Dr. Fazul Nabi Biological Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2042 Dr. Fehmeeda Bibi Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 2043 Dr. Feroz Ahmed Soomro Mathematics & Statistics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2044 Dr. Feroz Alam Jafri Agricultural Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2045 Dr. Feroz Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Gujrat PhD 2046 Dr. Feroz Shah Syed Mathematics & Statistics Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2047 Dr. Fiaz Ahmad Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 2048 Dr. Fiaz Alam Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2049 Dr. Fiaz Gul Khan Information Technology COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2050 Dr. Fiaz Hussain Physics University of Jhang PhD 2051 Dr. Fiaz Majeed Information Technology University of Gujrat PhD 2052 Dr. Fida Hussain Environmental Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 2053 Dr. Fida Rehman Physics Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 2054 Dr. Firdaus e Bareen Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2055 Dr. Firdos Atta Social Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2056 Dr. Firdos Khan Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2057 Dr. Firdous Imran Ali Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2058 Dr. Fiza Batool Mathematics & Statistics Minhaj University PhD 2059 Dr. Fiza Murtaza Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 2060 Dr. Fiza Qureshi Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2061 Dr. Fiza Zafar Mathematics & Statistics Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2062 Dr. Fizza Abbas Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2063 Ms. Fizza Asif Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 2064 Dr. Fizza Ghulam Nabi Engineering Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2065 Dr. Fouzia Atlas Social Sciences Women University PhD 2066 Dr. Fouzia Ghani Social Sciences Government College University PhD 2067 Dr. Fouzia Jabeen Information Technology Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 2068 Dr. Fouzia Perveen Malik Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2069 Ms. Fouzia Qureshi Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 2070 Dr. Fouzia Rehman Khan Social Sciences Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 2071 Dr. Fouzia Sadiq Biological Sciences Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University PhD 2072 Dr. Fouzia Shaikh Health Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 2073 Dr. Fouzia Tabssum Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 2074 Dr. Fouzia Tanvir Biological Sciences University of Okara PhD 2075 Dr. Fozia Batool Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2076 Dr. Fozia Fatima Social Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 2077 Dr. Fozia Hanif Mathematics & Statistics University of Karachi PhD 2078 Dr. Fozia Iram Chemical Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 2079 Dr. Fozia Khan Siyal Biological Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2080 Dr. Freeha Hafeez Chemical Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2081 Dr. Furkh Zeshan Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2082 Dr. Furqan Ahmed Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2083 Dr. Furqan Ahmed Siddiqi Health Sciences Foundation University PhD 2084 Dr. Furqan Asghar Engineering Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2085 Dr. Furqan Awan Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2086 Dr. Furqan Muhammad Iqbal Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2087 Dr. Furqan Shaukat Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2088 Gadahi@12345 2089 Dr. Garee Khan Earth Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 2090 Dr. Gauhar Rahman Mathematics & Statistics Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 2091 Dr. Gauhar Rehman Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2092 Dr. Ghafar Ali Social Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 2093 Dr. Ghalib Khan Social Sciences Khushal Khan Khattak University PhD 2094 Dr. Ghani Rahman Earth Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2095 Dr. Ghaus ur Rahman Mathematics & Statistics University of Swat PhD 2096 Dr. Ghayas Uddin Siddiqui Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2097 Dr. Ghayoor Abbas Chotana Chemical Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 2098 Dr. Ghazala Jabeen Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 2099 Dr. Ghazala Kaukab Raja Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2100 Dr. Ghazala Nazeer Mathematics & Statistics Government Sadiq College Women University PhD 2101 Dr. Ghazala Noureen Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 2102 Dr. Ghazala Shaheen Health Sciences Islamia University PhD 2103 Dr. Ghazala Yasmeen Butt Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2104 Dr. Ghous Ali Mathematics & Statistics University of Education PhD 2105 Dr. Ghufran Ahmed Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2106 Dr. Ghufran Ahmed Pasha Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2107 Dr. Ghufran Uddin Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2108 Dr. Ghufran ur Rehman Engineering Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 2109 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2110 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2111 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Environmental Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 2112 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Chemical Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 2113 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Mathematics & Statistics Islamia University PhD 2114 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 2115 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 2116 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Biological Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2117 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2118 Dr. Ghulam Abbas Shah Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2119 Dr. Ghulam Abid Social Sciences Kinnaird College for Women PhD 2120 Dr. Ghulam Ali Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2121 Dr. Ghulam Ali Information Technology Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2122 Dr. Ghulam Ali Biological Sciences Air University (Multan Campus) PhD 2123 Dr. Ghulam Ali Bugti Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2124 Dr. Ghulam Ali Buriro Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2125 Dr. Ghulam Ali Mallah Information Technology Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2126 Dr. Ghulam Bilal Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2127 Dr. Ghulam Chaudhary Social Sciences University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 2128 Dr. Ghulam Dastagir Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2129 Dr. Ghulam Farid Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 2130 Mr. Ghulam Farooq Social Sciences Directorate of Outreach Masters 2131 Dr. Ghulam Fatima Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2132 Dr. Ghulam Ghouse Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2133 Dr. Ghulam Ghouse Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2134 Dr. Ghulam Gilanie Information Technology Islamia University PhD 2135 Dr. Ghulam Haider Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2136 Dr. Ghulam Hussain Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 2137 Dr. Ghulam Hussain Social Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2138 Dr. Ghulam Hussain Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2139 Dr. Ghulam Hussain Jatoi Agricultural Sciences Mir Chakar Khan Rind University PhD 2140 Dr. Ghulam Moeen Uddin Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2141 Dr. Ghulam Mohyuddin Sohail Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2142 Dr. Ghulam Mueen Ud Din Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2143 Dr. Ghulam Muhammad Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 2144 Dr. Ghulam Muhammad Mustafa Physics University of Lahore PhD 2145 Dr. Ghulam Muhammad Mustafa Physics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2146 Dr. Ghulam Muhiuddin Solangi Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 2147 Dr. Ghulam Mujtaba Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2148 Dr. Ghulam Mujtaba Mari Chemical Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2149 Dr. Ghulam Muratza Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2150 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2151 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Mathematics & Statistics University of Management & Technology PhD 2152 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2153 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Physics The Islamia College PhD 2154 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Information Technology Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2155 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Social Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 2156 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Biological Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 2157 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Physics Government College University PhD 2158 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza khuhro Biological Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 2159 Dr. Ghulam Murtaza Lochi Agricultural Sciences Directorate General Livestock And Dairy Development Department, Domail PhD 2160 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Information Technology University of Management & Technology PhD 2161 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Chemical Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2162 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Social Sciences University of Education PhD 2163 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Social Sciences University of Education PhD 2164 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Social Sciences Government College University PhD 2165 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2166 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Mathematics & Statistics Islamia University PhD 2167 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2168 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Engineering Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 2169 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Information Technology Bahria University PhD 2170 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Kamal Chemical Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2171 Dr. Ghulam Mustafa Shah Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 2172 Dr. Ghulam Nabi Social Sciences University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 2173 Dr. Ghulam Qadar Chaudhary Engineering Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 2174 Dr. Ghulam Rasool Madni Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2175 Dr. Ghulam Rasool Madni Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2176 Dr. Ghulam Raza Biological Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 2177 Dr. Ghulam Sarwar Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2178 Dr. Ghulam Sarwar Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2179 Dr. Ghulam Sarwar Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2180 Dr. Ghulam Sarwar Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2181 Dr. Ghulam Shabbir Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2182 Dr. Ghulam Shabbir Social Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 2183 Dr. Ghulam Shabir Information Technology University of Central Punjab PhD 2184 Dr. Ghulam Shabir Solangi Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2185 Dr. Ghulam Shabir Barham Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2186 Dr. Ghulam Yaseen Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2187 Dr. Ghulamullah Khan Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2188 Dr. Gilal Rehman Gul Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2189 Dr. Gohar Abbas Physics Government College University PhD 2190 Dr. Gohar Ali Mathematics & Statistics The Islamia College PhD 2191 Dr. Gohar Ali Mahar Earth Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 2192 Mr. GOHAR NADEEM Social Sciences The University of Agriculture MPhil 2193 Dr. Gohar Rehman Chughtai Information Technology Women University PhD 2194 Dr. Guftaar Ahmad Sardar Sidhu Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2195 Dr. Gul Afshan Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2196 Dr. Gul I Hina Aslam Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2197 Dr. Gul Jan Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2198 Dr. Gul Nabi Khan Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 2199 Dr. Gul Rahim Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2200 Dr. Gul Rahman Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2201 Dr. Gul Rahmat Mathematics & Statistics The Islamia College PhD 2202 Dr. Gul Rooh Physics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2203 Dr. Gulab Fatima Rani Health Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 2204 Dr. Gulap Shahzada Social Sciences University of Science & Technology PhD 2205 Dr. Gulistan Raja Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2206 Dr. Gull-e-laala Khan Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 2207 Dr. Gulnaz Hameed Social Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2208 Dr. Gulnaz Parveen Biological Sciences Women University PhD 2209 Dr. Gulraiz Ahmed Engineering Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 2210 Dr. Gulshan Fatima Alvi Social Sciences Lahore Leads University PhD 2211 Dr. Gulshan Irshad Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2212 Dr. Gulsher Laghari Engineering Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2213 Dr. Gulzar Ahmad Information Technology Minhaj University PhD 2214 Dr. Gulzar Akhtar Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 2215 Dr. Gulzar Mehmood Information Technology Iqra National University PhD 2216 Dr. Gulzar Muhammad Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 2217 Dr. Haamid Jamil Physics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2218 Dr. Habib Ahmad Engineering Sciences International Islamic University PhD 2219 Dr. Habib Ahmad Social Sciences Air University PhD 2220 Dr. Habib Ali Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2221 Dr. Habib Nasir Chemical Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2222 Dr. Habib Ullah Pathan Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2223 Dr. Habib ur Rehman Chemical Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 2224 Dr. Habib ur Rehman Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2225 Dr. Habib Ur Rehman Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2226 Dr. Habib Ur Rehman Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2227 Dr. Habib ur Rehman Ahmed Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 2228 Dr. Habibullah Magsi Social Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2229 Dr. Hadeed Ahmed Sher Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 2230 Dr. Hadi Bux Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2231 Dr. Hadi Hassan Khan Social Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2232 Hafeez Anwar 2233 Dr. Hafeez Ullah Physics Islamia University PhD 2234 Dr. Hafeez Ullah Khan Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2235 Dr. Hafeez ur Rehman Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2236 Dr. Hafeez ur Rehman Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2237 Dr. Hafeez Ur Rehman Siddiqui Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2238 Dr. Hafeezur Rehman Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2239 Dr. Hafiz Tahir Jameel Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 2240 Dr. Hafiz Abdul Mannan Engineering Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2241 Dr. Hafiz AbdUl Muqeet Engineering Sciences Punjab Tianjin University of Technology PhD 2242 Dr. Hafiz Abdul Rehman Saleem Social Sciences University of Sahiwal PhD 2243 Dr. Hafiz Abdullah Shakir Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2244 Dr. Hafiz Ameenullah Aman Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 2245 Dr. Hafiz Awais Nawaz Chemical Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2246 Dr. Hafiz Azhar Rasool Social Sciences Namal Institute PhD 2247 Dr. Hafiz Farhan Maqbool Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2248 Dr. Hafiz Fukhar Ud Din Mathematics & Statistics Islamia University PhD 2249 Dr. Hafiz Ghufran Ali Khan Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 2250 Dr. Hafiz Ghulam Abbas Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 2251 Dr. Hafiz Ghulam Muhu Din Ahmed Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 2252 Dr. Hafiz Haider Ali Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 2253 Dr. Hafiz Hifazat Ullah Social Sciences The Islamia College PhD 2254 Dr. Hafiz Ishfaq Ahmad Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 2255 Dr. Hafiz Kamran Yousaf Agricultural Sciences University of Okara PhD 2256 Dr. Hafiz M Zaheer Aslam Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2257 Dr. Hafiz Mahfooz Ul Haque Information Technology University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2258 Dr. Hafiz Mohkum Hammad Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 2259 Dr. Hafiz Mudassir Munir Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2260 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Afzal Siddiqui Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2261 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Ahsan Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2262 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Ali Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2263 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Ali Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 2264 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Arshad Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) PhD 2265 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Asif Health Sciences Islamia University PhD 2266 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Asif Chemical Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2267 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Asif Javed Physics University of Agriculture PhD 2268 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Inamullah Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2269 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Irshadullah Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2270 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Kashif Irshad Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 2271 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Khurram Ali Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2272 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Mazhar Asjad Chemical Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 2273 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Naeem Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2274 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Noor ul Huda Khan Asghar Physics Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2275 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Obaid Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2276 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Obaid Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2277 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Omer Chughtai Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 2278 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Rashad Javeed Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 2279 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Rizwan Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2280 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Shahbaz Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2281 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Shahzad Munir Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2282 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Tahir Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2283 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Usman Aslam Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 2284 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Zubair Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2285 Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Zubair Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2286 Dr. Hafiz Muhammd Ali Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 2287 Dr. Hafiz Sohaib Zafar Malik Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2288 Dr. Hafiz Syed Hamid Arshad Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2289 Dr. Hafiz Syed Mohsin Abbas Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2290 Dr. Hafiz Ubaid ur Rahman Agricultural Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2291 Dr. Hafiz Umar Farid Engineering Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2292 Dr. Hafiz Zeshan Wadood Biological Sciences Lahore Garrison University PhD 2293 Dr. Hafiz Zia Ur Rehman Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 2294 Hafiza Amna Owais Ansari 2295 Dr. Hafsa Hina Social Sciences Pakistan Institute of Development Economics PhD 2296 Dr. Hafsa Jamshaid Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 2297 Dr. Hafsa Qamar Engineering Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 2298 Dr. Hafsa Sattar Biological Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 2299 Dr. Hafsa Zaneb Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2300 Dr. Hafsah Ahmad Engineering Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 2301 Dr. Hafsah Muhammad Biological Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 2302 Dr. Haidar Ali Mathematics & Statistics Riphah International University PhD 2303 Dr. Haidar Ali Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 2304 Dr. Haider Abbas Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2305 Dr. Haider Ali Mathematics & Statistics University of Peshawar PhD 2306 Dr. Haider Ali Malik Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2307 Dr. Haider Darain Health Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 2308 Dr. Haider Hasan Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2309 Dr. Haider Zaman Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2310 Dr. Haji Rahman Social Sciences University of Buner PhD 2311 Ms. Hajra Ahmad Social Sciences University of Lahore Masters 2312 Ms. Hajra Ahmad Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) Masters 2313 Dr. Hajra Ahmad Health Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 2314 Dr. Hakeem Ur Rehman Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2315 Dr. Hala Rajab Biological Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2316 Dr. Haleema Sadia Biological Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2317 Dr. Haleema Sadia Qureshi Physics Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 2318 Dr. Halima Nazar Health Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 2319 Dr. Halima Sadia Health Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 2320 Dr. Hamad Raza Social Sciences Government College University PhD 2321 Dr. Hamad ur Rahim Earth Sciences Pakistan Museum of Natural History (PMNH), PSF PhD 2322 Dr. Hamama Islam Butt Biological Sciences Minhaj University PhD 2323 Dr. Hamayoun Mahmood Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2324 Dr. Hamayun Khan Biological Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 2325 Dr. Hamayun Shaheen Biological Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 2326 Dr. Hamda Azmat Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2327 Dr. Hamda Khan Mathematics & Statistics National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2328 Dr. Hameed Hussain Information Technology University of Buner PhD 2329 Dr. Hameed Ullah Chemical Sciences The Islamia College PhD 2330 Dr. Hameeda Kalhoro Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2331 Dr. Hameeda Panezai Chemical Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2332 Dr. Hameedur Rahman Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 2333 Dr. Hamid Akbar Health Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2334 Dr. Hamid Ali Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2335 Dr. Hamid Bashir Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2336 Dr. Hamid Hassan Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2337 Dr. Hamid Khan Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 2338 Dr. Hamid Mukhtar Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2339 Dr. Hamid Rahman Mathematics & Statistics Women University PhD 2340 Dr. Hamid Saeed Shah Chemical Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2341 Dr. Hamid Ullah Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 2342 Dr. Hamid Ullah Social Sciences The Islamia College PhD 2343 Dr. Hamid Ullah Physics Riphah International University PhD 2344 Dr. Hamid Ullah Chemical Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2345 Dr. Hamida Bibi Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 2346 Dr. Hammad Munawar Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2347 Dr. Hammad Afzal Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2348 Dr. Hammad Afzal Kayani Biological Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 2349 Dr. Hammad Anis Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2350 Dr. Hammad Badar Social Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2351 Dr. Hammad Gilani Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 2352 Dr. Hammad Hassan Mirza Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2353 Dr. Hammad Ismail Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2354 Dr. Hammad M Cheema Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2355 Dr. Hammad Majeed Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2356 Dr. Hammad Naveed Biological Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2357 Dr. Hammad Riaz Social Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 2358 Dr. Hammad Tariq Janjuhah Earth Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 2359 Dr. Hammad Ullah Health Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2360 Hamna Batool 2361 Dr. Hamood Ur Rehman Mathematics & Statistics University of Okara PhD 2362 Dr. Hamza Ahmad Madni Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2363 Dr. Hanaa Iqbal Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2364 Dr. Haneef Rehman Biological Sciences University of Turbat PhD 2365 Dr. Hannan Bin Liaqat Engineering Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2366 Dr. Hannan Mukhtar Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 2367 Hanniah Tahir 2368 Mr. HANS MUKHEE Chemical Sciences University of Sindh MPhil 2369 Dr. Haq Nawaz Abbasi Environmental Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Abdul Haq Campus) PhD 2370 Dr. Haque Nawaz Information Technology Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 2371 Dr. Haris Khurram Mathematics & Statistics National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2372 Dr. Haris Masood Engineering Sciences University of Wah PhD 2373 Dr. Haroon Ahmed Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2374 Dr. Haroon Akbar Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2375 Dr. Haroon Asghar Physics National Centre for Physics (NCP) PhD 2376 Dr. Haroon Hussain Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2377 Dr. Haroon Khan Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2378 Dr. Haroon Mahmood Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2379 Dr. Haroon Qasim Social Sciences Minhaj University PhD 2380 Dr. Haroon Rahim Health Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 2381 Dr. Haroon Rashid Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 2382 Dr. Haroon Rashid Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 2383 Dr. Hasan Riaz Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 2384 Dr. Hasan Ali Khattak Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2385 Dr. Hasan Hanif Social Sciences Air University PhD 2386 Dr. Hasan Izhar Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2387 Dr. Hasan Khan Physics Islamia University PhD 2388 Dr. Hasan Mahmood Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 2389 Dr. Hasan Mujtaba Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2390 Dr. Hasan Mujtaba Health Sciences Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Medical University PhD 2391 Dr. Hasan Raza Engineering Sciences Hamdard University PhD 2392 Dr. Hasan Salman Siddiqi Health Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 2393 Dr. Hasan Sardar Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2394 Dr. Haseeb Anwar Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2395 Dr. Haseeb Ur Rahman Social Sciences University of Science & Technology PhD 2396 Dr. Hashim Ali Information Technology Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 2397 Dr. Hashim Iqbal Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2398 Dr. Hashim Yasin Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2399 Dr. Hasib Khan Mathematics & Statistics Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 2400 Dr. Hasnat Khurshid Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2401 Dr. Hasrat Hussain Shah Mathematics & Statistics Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2402 Dr. Hassaan Mehboob Awan Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2403 Dr. Hassan Abdullah Khalid Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2404 Dr. Hassan Ali Shah Syed Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2405 Dr. Hassan Anwer Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2406 Dr. Hassan Dawood Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2407 Dr. Hassan Elahi Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2408 Dr. Hassan Ijaz Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2409 Dr. Hassan Imam Social Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2410 Dr. Hassan Jamil Syed Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2411 Dr. Hassan Jawad Soomro Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2412 Dr. Hassan Mobeen Alam Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2413 Dr. Hassan Munir Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2414 Dr. Hassan Munir Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2415 Dr. Hassan Raza Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 2416 Dr. Hassan Saif Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2417 Mr. Hassan Shahzad Mathematics & Statistics Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 2418 Dr. Hassan Shakeel Shah Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2419 Dr. Hassan Sher Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 2420 Dr. Hassan Tariq Information Technology University of Agriculture PhD 2421 Dr. Hassan Waseem Biological Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 2422 Dr. Hayat Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2423 Dr. Hayat Muhammad Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2424 Dr. Hayat Ullah Physics Women University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 2425 Dr. Hayat Ullah Chemical Sciences University of Okara PhD 2426 Dr. Haziq Mehmood Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2427 Dr. Hazir Rahman Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2428 Dr. Hazrat Ali Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2429 Dr. Hazrat Bilal Social Sciences University of Swat PhD 2430 Dr. Henna Atif Qureshi Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2431 Dr. Hidayat Khan Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 2432 Dr. Hidayat Ullah Agricultural Sciences University of Swabi PhD 2433 Dr. Hidayat Ullah Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Malakand PhD 2434 Dr. Hidayat Ullah Khan Khattak Chemical Sciences Gomal University PhD 2435 Dr. Hidayatullah Shaikh Information Technology Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2436 Dr. Hikmat Khan Information Technology COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 2437 Hikmat Ullah 2438 Dr. Hina Abrar Chemical Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 2439 Dr. Hina Akram Mudassir Biological Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 2440 Dr. Hina Ali Social Sciences The Women University PhD 2441 Dr. Hina Ashraf Engineering Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 2442 Dr. Hina Fatima Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 2443 Dr. Hina Fazil Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2444 Dr. Hina Ismail Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 2445 Dr. Hina Javed Information Technology Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2446 Dr. Hina Kanwal Biological Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 2447 Dr. Hina Khan Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 2448 Hina Moin 2449 Dr. Hina Nasir Information Technology Air University PhD 2450 Dr. Hina Noor Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 2451 Dr. Hina Sadaf Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2452 Dr. Hina Shamshad Chemical Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 2453 Mrs. Hina Shoaib Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 2454 Dr. Hina Siddiqui Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2455 Dr. Hina Zahid Chemical Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 2456 Dr. Hina Zahir Mathematics & Statistics Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 2457 Dr. Hira Aftab Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2458 Dr. Hira Bashir Biological Sciences University of Okara PhD 2459 Dr. Hira Iqbal Mathematics & Statistics National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2460 Dr. Hira Khalid Chemical Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 2461 Dr. Hira Khanzada Agricultural Sciences Agricultural Research Institute PhD 2462 Dr. Hira Tariq Mathematics & Statistics Government College for Women University PhD 2463 Dr. Hirra Anjum Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2464 Dr. Hizba Waheed Chemical Sciences University of Wah PhD 2465 Dr. Hizbullah Khattak Information Technology Hazara University PhD 2466 home11$$44 2467 Dr. Huda Sarwar Biological Sciences University of Wah PhD 2468 Dr. Huma Abbas Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2469 Dr. Huma Ali Health Sciences PhD 2470 Dr. Huma Ali Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2471 Dr. Huma Dilshad Chemical Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 2472 Huma Fatima 2473 Dr. Huma Hayat Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 2474 Dr. Huma Lodhi Social Sciences University of Education PhD 2475 Dr. Huma Mujahid Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2476 Dr. Huma Nawaz Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 2477 Dr. Huma Naz Biological Sciences Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences PhD 2478 Dr. Huma Rasheed Chemical Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2479 Huma Salman 2480 Dr. Huma Tauseef Information Technology Lahore College for Women University PhD 2481 Dr. Huma Umbreen Health Sciences Government College University PhD 2482 Dr. Humaira Afzal Engineering Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2483 Dr. Humaira Ahmad Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2484 Dr. Humaira Asad Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2485 Dr. Humaira Ashraf Information Technology International Islamic University PhD 2486 Dr. Humaira Bano Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2487 Dr. Humaira Fatima Chemical Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2488 Dr. Humaira Gul Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2489 Dr. Humaira Mahmood Health Sciences National University of Medical Sciences MPhil 2490 Dr. Humaira Muzaffar Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2491 Dr. Humaira Rashid Khan Chemical Sciences Rawalpindi Women University PhD 2492 Dr. Humaira Razzaq Chemical Sciences University of Wah PhD 2493 Dr. Humaira Riaz Social Sciences City University of Science and Information Technology PhD 2494 Dr. Humaira Shahbaz Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 2495 Dr. Humaira Yasmeen Biological Sciences The Women University PhD 2496 Dr. Humaira Yasmin Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2497 Dr. Humayoon Shafique Satti Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 2498 Dr. Humayun Zubair Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2499 Dr. Humera Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2500 Dr. Humera Information Technology University of Karachi PhD 2501 Dr. Humera Amin Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2502 Dr. Humera Aziz Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 2503 Dr. Humera Farooq Information Technology Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 2504 Dr. Humera Kausar Biological Sciences Kinnaird College for Women PhD 2505 Dr. Humera Manzoor Social Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 2506 Dr. Humera Manzoor Biological Sciences University of Health Sciences PhD 2507 Dr. Humera Waheed Biological Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 2508 Dr. Hummaira Qudsia Yousaf Social Sciences The Superior College PhD 2509 Dr. Hummera Rafique Chemical Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2510 Dr. Hummera Saleem Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 2511 Dr. Husain Imran Syed Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2512 Dr. Husan Bano Channar Health Sciences Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences PhD 2513 Dr. Husnain Mansoor Ali Information Technology Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 2514 Mr. Husnain Tariq Social Sciences University of Lahore Masters 2515 Mr. Husnain Tariq Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) Masters 2516 Dr. Hussain Ahmad Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2517 Dr. Hussain Ahmed Biological Sciences University of Buner PhD 2518 Dr. Hussain Ali Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2519 Dr. Hussain Bakhsh Magsi Social Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2520 Mr. Hussain Bux Korejo Information Technology Pakistan Software Export Board (PSEB) Bachelors 2521 Dr. Hussain Gulab Chemical Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 2522 Dr. Hussain Mustatab Wahedi Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 2523 Dr. Hussan Bano Biological Sciences The Women University PhD 2524 Dr. Iahtasham Khan Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2525 Dr. Iahtisham Ul Haq Health Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 2526 Dr. Ibraheem Haneef Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 2527 Dr. Ibrahim Qazi Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Science and Technology PhD 2528 Dr. Ibrahim Tariq Javed Engineering Sciences Bahria University PhD 2529 Dr. Ibrar Hussain Information Technology University of Lahore PhD 2530 Dr. Ibrar Hussain Information Technology University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2531 Dr. Ibrar Hussain Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2532 Dr. Ibrar khan Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2533 Dr. Ibrar Khan Biological Sciences Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 2534 Ibtisam Zia 2535 Dr. Idrees Ahmad Nasir Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2536 Dr. Idrees Waris Social Sciences University of Turbat PhD 2537 Dr. Iffat Rohail Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 2538 Dr. Iffat Tabassum Earth Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2539 Dr. Iffat Zehra Mathematics & Statistics Air University PhD 2540 Dr. Ifqut Shaheen Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 2541 Dr. Ifra Noureen Mathematics & Statistics University of Management & Technology PhD 2542 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmad Information Technology University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2543 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics University of Gujrat PhD 2544 Prof. Iftikhar Ahmad Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2545 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmad Social Sciences Pakistan Institute of Development Economics PhD 2546 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmad Social Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2547 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmad Information Technology Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 2548 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmed Channa Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2549 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmed Khan Information Technology COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2550 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmed Saeed Information Technology University of Lahore PhD 2551 Dr. Iftikhar Ahmed Saeed Information Technology University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2552 Dr. Iftikhar Alam Information Technology City University of Science and Information Technology PhD 2553 Dr. Iftikhar Ali Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2554 Dr. Iftikhar Ali Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2555 Dr. Iftikhar Ali Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 2556 Dr. Iftikhar Azim Niaz Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2557 Dr. Iftikhar Hussain Social Sciences University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 2558 Dr. Iftikhar Rasheed Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 2559 Dr. Iftikhar Yasin Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 2560 Dr. Iftikhar Zeb Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2561 Dr. Ifzal Ahmad Social Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 2562 Dr. Ihsan Ali Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2563 Dr. Ihsan Rabbi Information Technology University of Science & Technology PhD 2564 Dr. Ihsan Ullah Chemical Sciences University of Swabi PhD 2565 Dr. Ihsan Ullah Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2566 Dr. IHSAN ULLAH Engineering Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2567 Dr. Ihsan Ullah Health Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 2568 Dr. Ihsan Ullah Information Technology University of Balochistan PhD 2569 Dr. Ihsanullah Daur Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 2570 Dr. Ihteram Ullah Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 2571 Dr. Ihtesham khan Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2572 Dr. Ihtesham Ul Islam Engineering Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 2573 Dr. Ihtisham Ali Engineering Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 2574 Dr. Ihtisham Ul Haq Social Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 2575 Dr. Ihtsham Ul Haq Padda Social Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology is listed as Federal Urdu University of Arts PhD 2576 Dr. Ihtzaz Qamar Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 2577 Dr. Ijaz Ahmad Biological Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 2578 Dr. Ijaz Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2579 Dr. Ijaz Ahmad Khan Physics Government College University PhD 2580 Dr. Ijaz Ahmad Tatlah Social Sciences University of Education PhD 2581 Dr. Ijaz Ali Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2582 Dr. Ijaz Ali Shoukat Information Technology Riphah International University PhD 2583 Dr. Ijaz Asghar Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2584 Dr. Ijaz Hussain Mathematics & Statistics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2585 Dr. Ijaz Hussain Bokhari Multidisciplinary Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 2586 Dr. Ijaz Khalid Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2587 Dr. Ijaz Mansoor Qureshi Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 2588 Dr. Ijaz Rasool Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2589 Dr. Ijaz Ul Haq Health Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2590 Dr. Ikhtiar Ahmed Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2591 Dr. Ikhtiar Ali Ghumro Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2592 Dr. Ikram Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Sahiwal PhD 2593 Dr. Ikram Badshah Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2594 Dr. Ikram Ilahi Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2595 Dr. Ikram Syed Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2596 Dr. Ikram Ullah Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 2597 Dr. Ikram Ullah Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 2598 Dr. Ikram Ullah Khan Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 2599 Dr. Ikram Ullah Khan Social Sciences University of Science & Technology PhD 2600 Dr. Ikramullah Khosa Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2601 Dr. Ikrima Khalid Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 2602 Dr. Illahi Bakhsh Marghazani Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2603 Dr. Illahi Bakhsh Marghazani Biological Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2604 Dr. Ilyas Ahmad Social Sciences University of Education PhD 2605 Dr. Ilyas Khan Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2606 Dr. Imad Ali Social Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2607 Dr. Imad Uddin Chemical Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2608 Dr. Imdad Khan Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2609 Dr. Imdad Ullah Chemical Sciences University of Science & Technology PhD 2610 Dr. Imdad Ullah Khan Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 2611 Dr. Imdad Ullah Khan Environmental Sciences Gomal University PhD 2612 Dr. Imdadullah Thaheem Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2613 Dr. Imran Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2614 Dr. Imran Abbas Jadoon Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2615 Dr. Imran Ahmad Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 2616 Dr. Imran Ahmed Information Technology Institute of Management Sciences PhD 2617 Dr. Imran Ahmed Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2618 Dr. Imran Ahmed Shah Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2619 Dr. Imran Ahmed Shahzad Social Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 2620 Dr. Imran Ahmed Siddiqi Information Technology Bahria University PhD 2621 Dr. Imran Akhtar Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2622 Dr. Imran Alam Moheet Health Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 2623 Dr. Imran Ali Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2624 Dr. Imran Ali Biological Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 2625 Dr. Imran Ali Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 2626 Dr. Imran Ali Hashmi Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2627 Dr. Imran Ali Lakhiar Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 2628 Dr. Imran Amin Biological Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 2629 Dr. Imran Anwar Mathematics & Statistics Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 2630 Dr. Imran Aziz Engineering Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 2631 Dr. Imran Ghous Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2632 Dr. Imran Hafeez Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2633 Dr. Imran Hameed Social Sciences Lahore School of Economics PhD 2634 Dr. Imran Hashmi Environmental Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2635 Dr. Imran Hayat Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 2636 Dr. Imran Javaid Mathematics & Statistics Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2637 Dr. Imran Khan Social Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2638 Dr. Imran Khan Social Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2639 Dr. Imran Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2640 Dr. Imran Khan Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 2641 Dr. imran khan Social Sciences Qurtaba University of Science & Information Technology PhD 2642 Dr. Imran Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2643 Dr. Imran Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2644 Dr. Imran Khan Information Technology The Superior College PhD 2645 Dr. Imran Khatri Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2646 Dr. Imran Mahmood Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2647 Dr. Imran Mahmood Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2648 Imran Manzoor 2649 Dr. Imran Naseem Engineering Sciences Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology PhD 2650 Dr. Imran Nazir Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2651 Dr. Imran Nazir Unar Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2652 Dr. Imran Pasha Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2653 Dr. Imran Qureshi Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2654 Dr. Imran Rafiq Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2655 Dr. Imran Sadiq Physics University of the Punjab PhD 2656 Dr. Imran Sajid Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2657 Dr. Imran Sarwar Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2658 Dr. Imran Sarwar Bajwa Information Technology Islamia University PhD 2659 Dr. Imran Shabbir Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2660 Dr. Imran Shah Engineering Sciences National University of Technology (NUTECH) PhD 2661 Dr. Imran Shahzad Social Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 2662 Dr. Imran Sharif Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2663 Dr. Imran Sharif Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2664 Dr. Imran Siddique Mathematics & Statistics University of Management & Technology PhD 2665 Dr. Imran Tariq Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2666 Dr. Imran Tipu Biological Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2667 Dr. Imran Ullah Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2668 Dr. Imran Ullah Shah Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2669 Dr. Imran Umer Chapra Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 2670 Dr. Imran Zahoor Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2671 Dr. Imran Zahoor Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 2672 Dr. Imran Zulfiqar Cheema Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2673 Dr. Imrana Niaz Sultan Biological Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2674 Dr. Imtiaz Ahmad Physics University of Peshawar PhD 2675 Dr. Imtiaz Ahmad Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2676 Dr. Imtiaz Ahmed Chandio Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2677 Dr. Imtiaz Alam Engineering Sciences Bahria University PhD 2678 Dr. Imtiaz Ali Brohi Information Technology Begum Nustrat Bhutto Women University PhD 2679 Dr. Imtiaz Ali Halepoto Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2680 Dr. Imtiaz Arif Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 2681 Dr. Imtiaz Hussain Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2682 Dr. Imtiaz Rabbani Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2683 Dr. Inam U llah Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2684 Dr. Inam Ullah Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2685 Dr. Inam Ullah Agricultural Sciences Hazara University PhD 2686 Dr. Inam Ullah Agricultural Sciences Hazara University PhD 2687 Dr. Inam Ullah Khan Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 2688 Dr. Inamullah Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2689 Dr. Inayat Khan Information Technology University of Buner PhD 2690 Dr. Inayat Shah Health Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 2691 Dr. Inayat Ullah Social Sciences COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 2692 Dr. Inayatullah Kakepoto Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2693 Dr. Inayatullah Magsi Social Sciences Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 2694 Dr. Intazar Ali Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2695 Dr. Iqbal Ahmad Environmental Sciences Gomal University PhD 2696 Dr. Iqbal Ahmad Chemical Sciences Baqai Medical University PhD 2697 Iqbal Ahmad 2698 Dr. Iqbal Ahmad Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2699 Dr. Iqbal Amin Khan Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2700 Dr. Iqbal Hussain Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2701 Dr. Iqbal Hussain Biological Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 2702 Dr. Iqbal Hussain Chemical Sciences The Islamia College PhD 2703 Prof. Iqbal Hussain Udaipurwala Health Sciences Bahria University Medical and Dental College PhD 2704 Dr. Iqbal Javed Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2705 Dr. Iqbal Javed Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2706 Dr. Iqbal Murtza Information Technology Air University PhD 2707 Dr. Iqra Arooj Biological Sciences The Women University PhD 2708 iqra bashir 2709 Ms. Iqra javed Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology Masters 2710 Iqra khan 2711 Ms. Iqra Rani Chemical Sciences University of Wah MPhil 2712 Dr. Iqra Shahzadi Mathematics & Statistics Sir Syed (CASE) Institute of Technology PhD 2713 Dr. Iqra Yasmin Biological Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 2714 Dr. Iqra Zubair Awan Chemical Sciences Lahore Garrison University PhD 2715 Dr. Iqtidar Hussain Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 2716 Dr. Iram Batool Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2717 Dr. Iram Fatima Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2718 Dr. Iram Fatima Biological Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 2719 Dr. Iram Iqbal Mathematics & Statistics University of Sargodha PhD 2720 Dr. Iram Khalid Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2721 Dr. Iram Liaqat Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 2722 Dr. Iram Maqsood Chemical Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2723 Dr. Iram Murtaza Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2724 Dr. Iram Naz Social Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2725 Dr. Iram Naz Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2726 Dr. Iram Noreen Information Technology Bahria University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2727 Dr. Irem Batool Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2728 Dr. Irfan Afzal Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2729 Dr. Irfan Ahmad Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2730 Dr. Irfan Ahmad Baig Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 2731 Dr. Irfan Ahmad Rana Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2732 Dr. Irfan Ahmed Physics NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2733 Dr. Irfan Ahmed Memon Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2734 Dr. Irfan Ahmed Rind Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2735 Dr. Irfan Ahmed Shaikh Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2736 Dr. Irfan Ahmed Shaikh Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2737 Dr. Irfan Ali Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2738 Dr. Irfan Ali Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2739 Dr. Irfan Anjum Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2740 Dr. Irfan Anjum Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2741 Dr. Irfan Anjum Manarvi Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 2742 Dr. IRFAN ASHRAF Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 2743 Dr. Irfan Hameed Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration PhD 2744 Dr. Irfan Irfan Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2745 Dr. Irfan Irshad Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 2746 Dr. Irfan Khan Health Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2747 Dr. Irfan Khan Social Sciences University of Lakki Marwat PhD 2748 Dr. Irfan Khattak Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2749 Dr. Irfan Mustafa Mathematics & Statistics Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 2750 Dr. Irfan Qasim Physics Riphah International University PhD 2751 Dr. Irfan Shahzad Sheikh Biological Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 2752 Dr. Irfan Siddique Social Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 2753 Dr. Irfan Ullah Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2754 Dr. Irfan Ullah Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2755 Dr. Irfan Ullah Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 2756 Dr. Irfan Ullah Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 2757 Dr. Irfan Ullah Information Technology Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 2758 Dr. Irfan Ullah Chemical Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 2759 Dr. Irfan Ullah Biological Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 2760 Dr. Irfan Ullah Earth Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 2761 Dr. Irfan Ullah Jan Earth Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2762 Dr. Irfan Ullah Khan Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 2763 Dr. Irfan Younas Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2764 Dr. Irfan Zia Qureshi Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2765 Dr. Irfana Bibi Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 2766 Dr. Irfana Lalarukh Lodhi Biological Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 2767 Dr. Irfanullah Khan Engineering Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 2768 Dr. Irrum Mushtaq Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 2769 Dr. Irsa Talib Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2770 Dr. Irshad Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2771 Dr. Irshad Ahmad Biological Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 2772 Dr. Irshad Ali Mari Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2773 Mr. Irshad Ullah Biological Sciences The Islamia College MPhil 2774 Mr. irshad ullah Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology Masters 2775 Dr. Irshad Ullah Engineering Sciences CECOS University of Information Technology & Emerging Sciences PhD 2776 Dr. Irshad Ur Rehman Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2777 Ms. Irum Fatima Chemical Sciences University of Wah MPhil 2778 Dr. Irum Inayat Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2779 Irum Jamil 2780 Dr. Irum Javed Biological Sciences Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 2781 Dr. Irum Naqvi Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2782 Dr. Irum Shahzadi Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2783 Dr. Isfahan Tauseef Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 2784 Dr. Ishaq Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 2785 Dr. Ishaq Ahmad Mian Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 2786 Dr. Ishfaq Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics International Islamic University PhD 2787 Dr. Ishfaq Ahmad Hafiz Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2788 Dr. Ishfaq Ahmed Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2789 Dr. Ishrat Asghar Physics University of Education PhD 2790 Dr. Ishrat Aziz Biological Sciences Virtual University of Pakistan PhD 2791 Dr. Ishrat Jabeen Chemical Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2792 Dr. Ishrat Mahjabeen Biological Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 2793 Dr. Ishrat Mubeen Dildar Physics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2794 Dr. Ishrat Younus Chemical Sciences Hamdard University PhD 2795 Dr. Ishrat Yousaf Social Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 2796 Dr. Ishtiaq Ahmad Engineering Sciences Gomal University PhD 2797 Dr. Ishtiaq Ahmad Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 2798 Dr. Ishtiaq Ahmad Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 2799 Dr. Ishtiaq Ahmad Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 2800 Dr. Ishtiaq Ahmad Khan Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2801 Dr. Ishtiaq Ahmed Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 2802 Dr. Ishtiaq Ahmed Social Sciences University of Education (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 2803 Dr. Ishtiaq Ali Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2804 Dr. Ishtiaq Hassan Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 2805 Dr. Ishtiaq Hussain Chemical Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 2806 Mr. Ishtiaq Rao Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2807 Dr. Ishtiaque Ahmad Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 2808 Islam Ud Din 2809 Dr. Isma Farah Siddiqui Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2810 Dr. Isma Zaighum Social Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 2811 Dr. Ismail Shah Mathematics & Statistics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2812 Dr. Ismail Shah Chemical Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2813 Dr. Ismara Naseem Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 2814 Dr. Ismat Naeem Physics International Islamic University PhD 2815 Dr. Israr Ahmad Chemical Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2816 Dr. Israr Ud Din Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2817 Dr. Itbar Khan Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2818 Dr. Itrat Abbas Mirza Mathematics & Statistics Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2819 Itrat Zehrh 2820 Dr. Izhar Ahmad Physics Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) PhD 2821 Dr. Izhar Ahmad Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 2822 Dr. Izhar Hyder Qazi Biological Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2823 Dr. Jabbar Khan Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 2824 Dr. Jabir Mumtaz Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 2825 Dr. Jafar Hasnain Mathematics & Statistics Bahria University PhD 2826 Dr. Jafar Khan Kasi Physics University of Balochistan PhD 2827 Dr. Jafer Rahman Mathematics & Statistics Hazara University PhD 2828 Dr. Jafir Shirazi Chemical Sciences Islamia University PhD 2829 Dr. Jahan Zaib Arshad Chemical Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 2830 Dr. Jahanara Ainuddin Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 2831 Dr. Jahangir Khan Engineering Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 2832 Dr. Jahangir Khan Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2833 Dr. Jahangir Khan Social Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 2834 Dr. Jahanzeb Khan Earth Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 2835 Dr. Jahanzeb Mudassir Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2836 Dr. Jaishri Mehraj Health Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 2837 Dr. Jallat Khan Chemical Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2838 Dr. Jam Ghulam Murtaza Sahito Social Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2839 Dr. Jam Muhammad Zafar Social Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2840 Dr. Jam Nazeer Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2841 Dr. Jam Shahzaib Khan Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2842 Dr. Jamal Abdul Nasir Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 2843 Dr. Jamal Abdul Nasir Information Technology International Islamic University PhD 2844 Dr. Jamal Hussain Shah Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 2845 Mr. Jamal Shams Khanzada Information Technology Dawood University of Engineering & Technology MPhil 2846 Dr. Jamal U Ddin Hajano Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2847 Dr. Jamal Umer Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2848 Dr. Jameel Ahemd Gandahi Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2849 Dr. Jameel Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2850 Dr. Jameel Ahmed Social Sciences University of Baltistan PhD 2851 Dr. Jameel Ahmed Baig Chemical Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2852 Dr. Jameel Ahmed Gandahi Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2853 Dr. Jamil Ahmad Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2854 Dr. Jamil Anwar Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2855 Dr. Jamil Anwar Social Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2856 Dr. Jamil Ur Rehman Memon Chemical Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2857 Dr. Jamila Khurshid Social Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 2858 Dr. Jamshad Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics University of Gujrat PhD 2859 Dr. Jamshaid Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2860 Dr. Jamshaid Hussain Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2861 Dr. Jamshaid Iqbal Environmental Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 2862 Dr. Jamshaid Iqbal Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 2863 Dr. Jamshaid Ul Rahman Mathematics & Statistics Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2864 Dr. Jamshed Hashim Chemical Sciences University of Lakki Marwat PhD 2865 Dr. Jamshed Iqbal Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2866 Dr. Jamshid Ali Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 2867 Dr. Jan Alam Social Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 2868 Dr. Javaid Ahmad Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 2869 Dr. Javaid Iqbal Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2870 Dr. Javaid Iqbal Agricultural Sciences Ghazi University PhD 2871 Dr. Javaria Abbas Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2872 Dr. Javaria Afzal Arain Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 2873 Dr. Javaria Nasir Social Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2874 Dr. Javaria Qazi Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 2875 Dr. Javed Ahmad Agricultural Sciences Ayub Agricultural Research Institute (AARI) PhD 2876 Dr. Javed Ahmed Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2877 Dr. Javed Ahmed Information Technology Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2878 Dr. Javed Ahmed Mahar Information Technology Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2879 Dr. Javed Ahmed Ujan Biological Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 2880 Dr. Javed Anver Qureshi Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2881 Dr. Javed Anver Qureshi Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2882 Dr. Javed Haneef Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2883 Dr. Javed Iqbal Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2884 Dr. Javed Iqbal Engineering Sciences Gomal University PhD 2885 Dr. Javed Iqbal Engineering Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 2886 Dr. Javed Iqbal Earth Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2887 Dr. Javed Iqbal Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2888 Dr. Javed Iqbal Biological Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 2889 Dr. Javed Iqbal Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2890 Dr. Javed Iqbal Bangash Information Technology The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 2891 Dr. Javed Iqbal Wattoo Biological Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 2892 Dr. Javed Muhammad Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2893 Dr. Javed Nawab Environmental Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2894 Ms. Javeria Sattar Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 2895 Ms. Javeria Sattar Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 2896 Dr. Javid Hussain Environmental Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 2897 Prof. Javid Shabbir Mathematics & Statistics University of Wah PhD 2898 Dr. Jawaad Ahmed Ansari Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2899 Dr. Jawad Abbas Social Sciences Iqra University (Islamabad Campus) PhD 2900 Dr. Jawad Ahmed Mathematics & Statistics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2901 Dr. Jawad Aslam Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2902 Dr. Jawad Hussain Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 2903 Dr. Jawad Manzoor Information Technology Air University PhD 2904 Dr. Jawad Raza Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 2905 Dr. Jawad Safdar Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 2906 Mr. Jawad Shafique Engineering Sciences Survey of Pakistan 2907 Dr. Jawaid Ahmed Qureshi Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 2908 Dr. Jawaid Iqbal Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 2909 Dr. Jaweria Kanwal Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 2910 Dr. Jaweria Zartaj Hashmi Physics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2911 Dr. Jawwad Ahmed Shamsi Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Karachi Campus) PhD 2912 Dr. Jawwad Nasar Chattha Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 2913 Mr. Jehan Zaib Arshad Health Sciences Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center MPhil 2914 Dr. Jehan Zeb Engineering Sciences Sir Syed (CASE) Institute of Technology PhD 2915 Mr. Jehangir Khan Biological Sciences University of Wah MPhil 2916 Dr. Jehanzeb Masud Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 2917 Dr. Jibran Hussain Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 2918 Dr. Jibran Rashid Information Technology Institute of Business Administration PhD 2919 Dr. Johar Khurshid Farooqi Engineering Sciences DHA Suffa University PhD 2920 Dr. Juma Muhammad Environmental Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 2921 Dr. Junaid Ahmad Environmental Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2922 Dr. Junaid Ahmed Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 2923 Dr. Junaid Athar Khan Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 2924 Dr. Junaid Jahangir Social Sciences Preston University PhD 2925 Dr. Junaid Mir Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2926 Dr. Junaid Munir Physics Riphah International University PhD 2927 Dr. Junaid Nawaz Chauhdary Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2928 Dr. Junaid Nawaz Syed Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2929 Dr. Junaid Rehman Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 2930 Dr. Junaid Shuja Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 2931 Mr. Junaid Tariq Mathematics & Statistics University of Karachi Masters 2932 Dr. Junaid Ul Haq Social Sciences Riphah International University PhD 2933 Dr. Junaid Zafar Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 2934 Jyesha Mustafa 2935 Dr. Kafeel Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2936 Dr. Kaleem Razzaq Malik Information Technology Air University (Multan Campus) PhD 2937 Dr. Kalim Ul Haq Tariq Mathematics & Statistics Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 2938 Dr. Kalim Ullah Physics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2939 Dr. Kalsoom BeBe Sumra Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 2940 Dr. Kalsoom Sughra Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 2941 Dr. Kamal Ahmed Engineering Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2942 Dr. Kamal Ahmed Soomro Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 2943 Dr. Kamal Haider Social Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 2944 Dr. Kamal Niaz Biological Sciences Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences PhD 2945 Dr. Kamal Shah Mathematics & Statistics University of Malakand PhD 2946 Dr. Kamleshwer Lohana Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2947 Dr. Kamran Mathematics & Statistics The Islamia College PhD 2948 Dr. Kamran Abid Engineering Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2949 Dr. Kamran Ahmed Soomro Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 2950 Dr. Kamran Ahsan Information Technology Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 2951 Mr. Kamran Ali Biological Sciences Department of Health MPhil 2952 Dr. Kamran Ali Memon Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2953 Dr. Kamran Ali Memon Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2954 Dr. Kamran Asim Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2955 Dr. Kamran Azeem Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 2956 Dr. Kamran Ikram Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 2957 Dr. Kamran Khan Social Sciences KASB Institute of Technology PhD 2958 Dr. Kamran Khan Mathematics & Statistics Iqra University (North Campus) PhD 2959 Dr. Kamran Naeem Social Sciences Mir Chakar Khan Rind University PhD 2960 Dr. Kamran Nazir Memon Mathematics & Statistics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 2961 Dr. Kamran Rasheed Qureshi Engineering Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 2962 Dr. Kamran Raza Engineering Sciences Iqra University PhD 2963 Dr. Kamran Saleem Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 2964 Dr. Kamran Shah Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2965 Dr. Kamran Sohail Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 2966 Dr. Kamran Tahir Chemical Sciences Gomal University PhD 2967 Dr. Kamran Zeb Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2968 Dr. Kaneez Fatima Social Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 2969 Kaneez Fatima 2970 Dr. Kanwal Haneef Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 2971 Dr. Kanwal Iqbal Khan Social Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2972 Dr. Kanwal Rehman Chemical Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 2973 Dr. Kanza Aziz Awan Agricultural Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 2974 Dr. Karam Dad Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2975 Dr. Karim Bux Shah Syed Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 2976 Dr. Karim Haider Shah Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 2977 Dr. Karim Ullah Social Sciences Institute of Management Sciences PhD 2978 Karim yar Abbasi 2979 Dr. Kashif Ali Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 2980 Dr. Kashif Ali Biological Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 2981 Dr. Kashif Ali Abro Mathematics & Statistics Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 2982 Dr. Kashif Ali Kubar Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 2983 Dr. Kashif Ameer Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2984 Dr. Kashif Ameer Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 2985 Dr. Kashif Barkat Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2986 Dr. Kashif Barkat Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2987 Dr. Kashif Bashir Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 2988 Dr. Kashif Bashir Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 2989 Dr. Kashif Bashir Biological Sciences Abasyn University PhD 2990 Dr. Kashif Bilal Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 2991 Dr. Kashif Farhat Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 2992 Dr. Kashif Gul Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 2993 Dr. Kashif Hussain Biological Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 2994 Dr. Kashif Hussain Social Sciences The Superior College PhD 2995 Dr. Kashif Hussain Memon Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 2996 Dr. Kashif Hussain Talpur Information Technology Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 2997 Dr. Kashif Imran Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 2998 Dr. Kashif Imran Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 2999 Dr. Kashif Imran Zadi Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3000 Dr. Kashif Iqbal Chemical Sciences University of Loralai PhD 3001 Dr. Kashif Iqbal Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 3002 Dr. Kashif Ishaque Engineering Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 3003 Dr. Kashif Javaid Physics Government College University PhD 3004 Dr. Kashif Javed Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3005 Dr. Kashif Mahmood Social Sciences The Superior College PhD 3006 Dr. Kashif Maqbool Khan Chemical Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3007 Dr. Kashif Mehboob Khan Information Technology NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3008 Dr. Kashif Mehmood Social Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 3009 Dr. Kashif Munir Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3010 Dr. Kashif Nadeem Physics International Islamic University PhD 3011 Dr. Kashif Nauman Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3012 Dr. Kashif Nisar Paracha Engineering Sciences Government College University PhD 3013 Dr. Kashif Rathore Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3014 Kashif Raza 3015 Dr. Kashif Razzaq Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 3016 Dr. Kashif Riaz Engineering Sciences Information Technology University of the Punjab PhD 3017 Dr. Kashif Rizwan Information Technology Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology is listed as Federal Urdu University of Arts PhD 3018 Kashif Roy 3019 Dr. Kashif Saeed Khan Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3020 Dr. Kashif Sarfraz Abbasi Health Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3021 Dr. Kashif Shafique Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 3022 Dr. Kashif Ullah Khan Social Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 3023 Dr. Kashif ur Rehman Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 3024 Dr. Kashif Ur Rehman Khan Chemical Sciences Islamia University PhD 3025 Dr. Kashif Zafar Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 3026 Dr. Kashif-ur-Rehman Biological Sciences Minhaj University PhD 3027 Dr. Kausar Abbas Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3028 Dr. Kausar Abbas Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3029 Dr. Kausar Parveen Information Technology Lahore Garrison University PhD 3030 Dr. Kauser Hayat Social Sciences University of Swat PhD 3031 Dr. Kavita Tabassum Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3032 Dr. Kh ijaz Ahmed Qureshi Biological Sciences Federal Seed Certification & Registration Department (FSC&RD) PhD 3033 Dr. Khadija Aaliya Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3034 Dr. Khadija Bari Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration PhD 3035 Dr. Khadija Gilani Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3036 Dr. Khadija Gilani Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3037 Dr. Khadija Qureshi Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3038 Dr. Khadija Shams Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 3039 Khadija Tariq 3040 Dr. Khadija Tul Kubra Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 3041 Dr. Khadim Hussain Social Sciences Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University Lyari PhD 3042 Dr. Khadim Hussain Memon Biological Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 3043 Dr. Khafsa Malik Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3044 Dr. Khair Zaman Chemical Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3045 Dr. Khairullah Khan Information Technology University of Science & Technology PhD 3046 Dr. Khaista Rehman Earth Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3047 Dr. Khajista Jabeen Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 3048 Dr. Khalid Abbas Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3049 Dr. Khalid Abdul Majeed Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3050 Dr. Khalid Ahmed Chemical Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 3051 Dr. Khalid Ahmed Chemical Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 3052 Dr. Khalid Hameed Biological Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 3053 Dr. Khalid Haseeb Information Technology The Islamia College PhD 3054 Dr. Khalid Hussain Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3055 Dr. Khalid Hussain Dhiloo Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3056 Dr. Khalid Hussain Rind Biological Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 3057 Dr. Khalid Hussain Shah Physics University of Narowal PhD 3058 Dr. Khalid Javed Physics Forman Christian College PhD 3059 Dr. Khalid Khan Social Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 3060 Dr. Khalid Khan Information Technology Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology PhD 3061 Dr. Khalid Latif Social Sciences Government College University PhD 3062 Dr. Khalid Latif Earth Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3063 Dr. Khalid Mahmood Information Technology COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) PhD 3064 Dr. Khalid Mahmood Environmental Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3065 Dr. Khalid Mahmood Anjum Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3066 Dr. Khalid Manzoor Butt Social Sciences Government College University PhD 3067 Dr. Khalid Mehmood Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 3068 Dr. Khalid Mehmood Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3069 Dr. Khalid Mehmood Biological Sciences Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 3070 Dr. Khalid Mohammed Khan Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3071 Dr. Khalid Mushtaq Social Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3072 Dr. Khalid Nadeem Riaz Physics University of Okara PhD 3073 Dr. Khalid Naseer Physics University of Sargodha PhD 3074 Dr. Khalid Naveed Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 3075 Dr. Khalid Nawaz Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3076 Khalid Rasheed Memon 3077 Dr. Khalid Rauf Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3078 Dr. Khalid Rehman Health Sciences Khyber Medical College PhD 3079 Dr. Khalid Rehman Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 3080 Dr. Khalid Sultan Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 3081 Dr. Khalid Zaman Social Sciences University of Haripur PhD 3082 Dr. Khalida Bano Health Sciences Bolan Medical College PhD 3083 Dr. Khalida Inayat Noor Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3084 Dr. Khalida Naseem Chemical Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 3085 Dr. Khalida Tanweer Social Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 3086 Dr. Khalifa Qasim Laghari Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3087 Dr. Khalil Ahmad Chemical Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 3088 Dr. Khalil Ahmad Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3089 Dr. Khalil Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics Air University PhD 3090 Dr. Khalil Ahmed Channa Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 3091 Dr. Khalil Khadim Hussain Chemical Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 3092 Dr. Khalil Rehman Memon Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3093 Dr. khalil Ullah Engineering Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3094 Dr. Khalil Ullah Mohammad Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 3095 Dr. Khalil Ur Rahman Social Sciences Hazara University PhD 3096 Dr. Khaliqur Rahman Raazi Muhammad Syed Information Technology Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 3097 Dr. Khan Alam Physics University of Peshawar PhD 3098 Dr. Khan Shahzada Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3099 Dr. Khanji Harijan Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3100 Dr. Khanoranga Biological Sciences Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 3101 Dr. Khansa Masood Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3102 Dr. Khawaja Arsalan Habib Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 3103 Dr. Khawaja Asif Mehmood Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3104 Khawaja Ayaz Ahmad 3105 Dr. Khawaja Fawad Latif Social Sciences COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 3106 Dr. Khawaja Jehanzeb Social Sciences GIFT University PhD 3107 Dr. Khawaja Khalid Mehmood Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3108 Dr. Khawaja Qasim Maqbool Engineering Sciences Bahria University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3109 Dr. Khawaja Shafaat Ahmed Bazaz Information Technology Sir Syed (CASE) Institute of Technology PhD 3110 Dr. Khawaja Shafique Ahmad Biological Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 3111 Dr. Khawar Ali Shahzad Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 3112 Dr. Khawar Mehmood Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Space Technology PhD 3113 Dr. Khawar Mohiuddin Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3114 Dr. Khawar Naheed Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3115 Dr. Khawer Bilal Baig Social Sciences Bahria University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3116 Dr. Khazar Hayat Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3117 Dr. Khazar Hayat Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3118 Dr. Khezina Rafiq Chemical Sciences Islamia University PhD 3119 Dr. Khisro Kaleem Raza Social Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 3120 Dr. Khizar Abbas Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3121 Dr. Khizar Hayat Mathematics & Statistics University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 3122 Dr. Khizar Samiullah Biological Sciences Ghazi University PhD 3123 Dr. Khizer Mehmood Engineering Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3124 Dr. Khubab Shaker Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 3125 Dr. Khuda Bakhsh Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 3126 Dr. Khuram Ali Physics University of Agriculture PhD 3127 Dr. Khuram Ali Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Sargodha PhD 3128 Mr. Khuram Hasnain Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University MPhil 3129 Dr. Khuram Naveed Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3130 Dr. Khuram Nawaz Sadozai Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3131 Dr. Khuram Rashid Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3132 Dr. Khuram Shafi Social Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 3133 Dr. Khuram Shahzad Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3134 Dr. Khuram Shahzad Multidisciplinary University of Balochistan PhD 3135 Dr. Khuram Shahzad Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3136 Dr. Khuram Shahzad Ahmad Chemical Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 3137 Dr. Khurram Ejaz Information Technology University of Lahore PhD 3138 Dr. Khurram Ejaz Information Technology University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3139 Dr. Khurram Hashmi Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3140 Dr. Khurram Imran Khan Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 3141 Dr. Khurram Javid Mathematics & Statistics Northern University PhD 3142 Dr. Khurram Saleem Alimgeer Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3143 Dr. Khurram Shahzad Social Sciences Riphah International University PhD 3144 Dr. Khurram Shahzad Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 3145 Dr. Khurram Shahzad Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 3146 Dr. Khurram Shahzad Munawar Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3147 Dr. Khurram Shakir Social Sciences Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University Lyari PhD 3148 Dr. khurram Siraj Physics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3149 Dr. Khurram Yaqoob Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3150 Dr. Khurram Yousaf Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3151 Dr. Khurram Ziaf Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3152 Dr. Khurshaid Khan Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3153 Dr. Khurshed Ali Information Technology Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 3154 Dr. Khurshid Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3155 Dr. Khurshid Alam Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3156 Dr. Khurshid Ayub Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3157 Dr. Khush Bakht Hina Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 3158 Dr. Khushi Muhammad Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 3159 Dr. Khushnood Ur Rehman Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 3160 Dr. Kifayat Ullah Mathematics & Statistics Riphah International University PhD 3161 Dr. Kifayat Ullah Information Technology University of Swat PhD 3162 Dr. Kifayat Ullah Mathematics & Statistics University of Lakki Marwat PhD 3163 Dr. Kifayat Ullah Information Technology CECOS University of Information Technology & Emerging Sciences PhD 3164 Dr. Kifayat Ullah Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3165 Dr. Kifayat Ullah Shah Chemical Sciences Gomal University PhD 3166 Kiran 3167 Dr. Kiran Afshan Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3168 Dr. Kiran Aftab Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3169 Dr. Kiran Hina Agricultural Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3170 Dr. Kiran Jameel Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration PhD 3171 Kiran Rabbani 3172 Dr. Kiran Rafiq Chemical Sciences PhD 3173 Dr. Kiran Shahid Siddiqui Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3174 Dr. Kiran Shahjeer Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3175 Dr. Kiran Shahzadi Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 3176 Kishor Kumar Jodhani 3177 Dr. Kishwar Sultana Chemical Sciences Iqra University PhD 3178 Dr. Komal Bashir Information Technology Lahore College for Women University PhD 3179 Dr. Komal Rizwan Chemical Sciences University of Sahiwal PhD 3180 Dr. Korai Muhammad Safar Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3181 Dr. Kousar Yasmeen Chemical Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 3182 Dr. Krishan Lal Khatri Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3183 Dr. Kulsoom Farhat Health Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 3184 Dr. Kulsoom Ghias Health Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 3185 Dr. Labiba Gillani Fahad Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3186 Dr. Laeeq Riaz Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3187 Dr. Laeiq Ahmad Earth Sciences University of Swabi PhD 3188 Dr. Laila Fayyaz Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3189 Dr. Laila Jafri Biological Sciences Abasyn University (Islamabad Campus) PhD 3190 Dr. Laila Shehzad Environmental Sciences Government College University PhD 3191 Dr. Laiq Hasan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3192 Dr. Laiq Khan Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3193 Dr. Lakhi Muhammad Social Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 3194 Dr. Lal Hussain Information Technology University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 3195 Dr. Lala Rukh Social Sciences University of Swat PhD 3196 Dr. Laraib Sarfraz Khanzada Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3197 Dr. Latif Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 3198 Dr. Latif Jan Engineering Sciences Iqra National University PhD 3199 Dr. Latif ur Rahman Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3200 Dr. Laveet Kumar Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3201 Dr. Lawangin Sheikh Earth Sciences University of Swabi PhD 3202 Dr. Leena Anum Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3203 Dr. Leena Anum Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3204 Dr. Liaqat Ali Social Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 3205 Liaqat Ali 3206 Dr. Liaqat Ali Chemical Sciences University of Mianwali PhD 3207 Dr. Liaqat Ali Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 3208 Dr. Liaqat Ali Waseem Earth Sciences Government College University PhD 3209 Dr. Liaqat Hussain Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 3210 Dr. Liaqat Iqbal Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3211 Liaqat Rasheed 3212 Dr. Liaquat Ali Memon Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 3213 Dr. Lubna Chemical Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3214 Dr. Lubna Ansari Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3215 Dr. Lubna Baig Health Sciences PhD 3216 Dr. Lubna Farhi Engineering Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3217 Dr. Lubna Maroof Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 3218 Dr. Lubna Naz Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration PhD 3219 Dr. Lubna Rasheed Chemical Sciences University of Education PhD 3220 Dr. Lubna Sherin Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3221 Dr. Luqman Ahmad Nizam Engineering Sciences HITEC University PhD 3222 Dr. Luqman Ali Shah Chemical Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3223 Dr. Luqman Amrao Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3224 Dr. Luqman Khan Biological Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 3225 Dr. Luqman Shah Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 3226 Dr. M Adnan Aslam Noon Engineering Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3227 Dr. M Mohsin Riaz Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3228 Dr. M Munawwar Iqbal Ch Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3229 Dr. M Nafees Mumtaz Qadri Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3230 Dr. M Sadiq Ali Khan Information Technology University of Karachi PhD 3231 M.muneeb jafar 3232 Dr. Maasoomah Sadaf Mathematics & Statistics University of the Punjab PhD 3233 Dr. Maaz Akhtar Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3234 Dr. Madad Khan Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3235 Dr. Madan Lal Chemical Sciences University of Sindh PhD 3236 Dr. Madeeha Arshad Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 3237 Dr. Madeeha Chaudhry Biological Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3238 Dr. Madeeha Fatima Engineering Sciences Riphah International University PhD 3239 Dr. Madeeha Riaz Physics Lahore College for Women University PhD 3240 Dr. Madeeha Shahzad Lodhi Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3241 Dr. Madeeha Shahzad Lodhi Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3242 Dr. Madiha Ahmed Chemical Sciences Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University PhD 3243 Dr. Madiha Amjad Information Technology Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 3244 Dr. Madiha Atta Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3245 Dr. Madiha Atta Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3246 Ms. Madiha Awais Social Sciences University of Lahore Masters 3247 Ms. Madiha Awais Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) Masters 3248 Dr. Madiha Fayyaz Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3249 Dr. Madiha Fayyaz Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3250 Dr. Madiha Gohar Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3251 Dr. Madiha Khalid Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 3252 Dr. Madiha Liaqat Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3253 Dr. Madiha Rohi Agricultural Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 3254 Mah Noor 3255 Maha Ali 3256 Mrs. Maha Zaka Engineering Sciences Iqra University (North Campus) Masters 3257 Maham Ashraf 3258 Dr. Maham Hussain Engineering Sciences NFC Institute of Engineering & Technology PhD 3259 Dr. Mahboob Alam Syed Chemical Sciences PhD 3260 Dr. Mahboob Hussain Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3261 Dr. Mahesh Kumar Biological Sciences Liaquat University of Medical & Health Sciences PhD 3262 Ms. Mahin Malik Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 3263 Dr. Mahmood Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 3264 Dr. Mahmood Ahmed Chemical Sciences University of Education PhD 3265 Dr. Mahmood Akhtar Kayani Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3266 Dr. Mahmood Laghari Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3267 Dr. Mahmood Rehmani Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3268 Dr. Mahmood Rehmani Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3269 Dr. Mahmood Saba Biological Sciences King Edward Medical University PhD 3270 Dr. Mahmood Ul Hassan Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 3271 Mahmood Ul Hassan 3272 Dr. Mahmood Ul Hassan Physics University of the Punjab PhD 3273 Dr. Mahmood Ul Hassan Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3274 Dr. Mahpara Safdar Health Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 3275 Dr. Mahr Un Nisa Health Sciences Government College University PhD 3276 Dr. MAHR UN NISA Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 3277 Dr. Mahroze Fatima Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3278 Ms. MAHRUKH MAZHAR Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology MPhil 3279 Dr. Mahrukh Naseem Biological Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 3280 Dr. Mahtab Ahmad Environmental Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3281 Dr. Mahtab Ahmad Khan Health Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 3282 Dr. Mahwish Arooj Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3283 Dr. Mahwish Arooj Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3284 Dr. Mahwish Bano Mathematics & Statistics Air University PhD 3285 Dr. Mahwish Parveen Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3286 Dr. Mahwish Salman Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 3287 Dr. Mahwish Zafar Social Sciences The Superior College PhD 3288 Ms. Maidah Environmental Sciences University of Lahore Bachelors 3289 Ms. Maidah Environmental Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) Bachelors 3290 Dr. Mairaj Din Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3291 Dr. Maisoor Ahmed Biological Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 3292 Dr. Majid Ali Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3293 Dr. Majid Ali Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 3294 Dr. Majid Ali Rana Social Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3295 Dr. Majid Ali Shah Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 3296 Dr. Majid Hussain Environmental Sciences University of Haripur PhD 3297 Dr. Majid Hussain Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3298 Dr. Majid Hussain Alias Ghalib Hussain Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 3299 Majid Iqbal 3300 Dr. Majid Iqbal Khan Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3301 Dr. Majid Jamal Khan Social Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 3302 Dr. Majid Khan Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3303 Dr. Majid Khan Physics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3304 Dr. Majid Khan Physics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3305 Dr. Majid Mumtaz Engineering Sciences Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University PhD 3306 Dr. Majid Murad Social Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3307 Dr. Majid Murad Social Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3308 Dr. Majid Murad Social Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3309 Dr. Majid Suhail Hashmi Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3310 Dr. Majida Kazmi Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3311 Dr. Maksal Minaz Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3312 Dr. Maleeha Manzoor Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 3313 Dr. Malik Amer Atta Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 3314 Dr. Malik Azhar Hussain Social Sciences National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 3315 Dr. Malik Badshah Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3316 Dr. Malik Fahim Bashir Social Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3317 Dr. Malik Faisal Azeem Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3318 Dr. Malik Hassan Mehmood Health Sciences Government College University PhD 3319 Dr. Malik Ihsan Ullah Khan Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3320 Dr. Malik Ihsan Ullah Khan Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3321 Dr. Malik Intisar Ali Sajjad Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3322 Dr. Malik Mamoon Munir Social Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 3323 Dr. Malik Muhammad Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3324 Dr. Malik Muhammad Afzal Social Sciences Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF) PhD 3325 Dr. Malik Muhammad Saad Missen Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 3326 Dr. Malik Shoaib Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3327 Dr. Malik Tahir Hassan Information Technology University of Management & Technology PhD 3328 Dr. Malik Tahir Hayat Environmental Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3329 Dr. Malik Tariq Mahmood Information Technology Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 3330 Dr. Malik Tusif Ahmed Mathematics & Statistics Hazara University PhD 3331 Dr. Malik Zia Ud Din Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 3332 Dr. Malika Rani Physics The Women University PhD 3333 Dr. Malka Saba Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3334 Malka Saba 3335 Dr. Mamona Nazir Chemical Sciences Government Sadiq College Women University PhD 3336 Dr. Mamoona Chaudhry Health Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3337 Dr. Mamoona Munir Biological Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3338 Dr. Mamoona Rauf Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3339 Mamoona Zafar 3340 Dr. Manan Khan Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 3341 Dr. Mansoor Ahmed Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3342 Dr. Mansoor Ahmed Channa Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 3343 Dr. Mansoor Ahmed Khuhro Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 3344 Dr. Mansoor Ahmed Soomro Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 3345 MANSOOR AKHTAR 3346 Dr. Mansoor Asif Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3347 Dr. Mansoor Shaukat Khan Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3348 Dr. Mansoor Tariq Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3349 Dr. Mansoor Ul Hassan Shah Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3350 Dr. Manzar Zahra Awan Chemical Sciences Lahore Garrison University PhD 3351 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Physics International Islamic University PhD 3352 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3353 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3354 Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Alazhari Social Sciences HITEC University PhD 3355 Dr. Manzoor Ali Abro Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3356 Dr. Manzoor Ali Mirani Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 3357 Dr. Manzoor Hussain Chemical Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 3358 Dr. Manzoor Hussain Mathematics & Statistics Women University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 3359 Dr. Manzoor Ikram Physics Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 3360 Dr. Maqbool Ahmad Chaudhry Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 3361 Dr. Maqbool Ahmad Chaudhry Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3362 Dr. Maqbool H Sial Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3363 Dr. Maqbool Khan Information Technology Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 3364 Dr. Maqshoof Ahmad Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 3365 Dr. Maqsood Ahmad Environmental Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 3366 Dr. Maqsood Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3367 Dr. Maqsood Ahmed Chotani Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3368 Dr. Maqsood Ahmed Khan Chemical Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 3369 Dr. Maqsood Ahmed Khan Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3370 Dr. Maqsood Ali Ansari Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3371 Dr. Maqsood Haider Social Sciences University of FATA PhD 3372 Dr. Maqsood Hayat Information Technology Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3373 Dr. Maqsood Ur Rehman Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3374 Dr. Maratab Ali Agricultural Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3375 Dr. Maria Anjum Information Technology Lahore College for Women University PhD 3376 Dr. Maria Atiq Physics Islamia University PhD 3377 Dr. Maria Hussain Mathematics & Statistics Lahore College for Women University PhD 3378 Dr. Maria Idrees Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3379 Dr. Maria Javed Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 3380 Dr. Maria Khan Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3381 Dr. Maria Mustafa Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3382 Dr. Maria Saifuddin Effendi Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 3383 Dr. Maria Shabbir Health Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3384 Ms. Maria Shafique Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 3385 Dr. Maria Shams Khakwani Social Sciences The Women University PhD 3386 Dr. Maria Shams Khakwani Social Sciences The Women University PhD 3387 MARIA SIDDIQUE 3388 Dr. Maria Taimoor Khan Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 3389 Dr. Maria Waqas Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3390 Dr. Maria Zaib Chemical Sciences University of Jhang PhD 3391 Dr. Mariam Akbar Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3392 Dr. Mariam Anees Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3393 Dr. Mariam Ashraf Health Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 3394 Dr. Mariam Mahmood Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3395 Mariam Naeem 3396 Dr. Mariam Shahid Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3397 Dr. Mariam Sheikh Mathematics & Statistics University of Sialkot PhD 3398 Dr. Mariam Sultana Mathematics & Statistics Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 3399 Dr. Marium Din Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 3400 Dr. Marium Fatima Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 3401 Dr. Marium Jalal Chaudhry Engineering Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 3402 Dr. Marium Tariq Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3403 Dr. Maroof Bin Rauf Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3404 Dr. Maryam Azam Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 3405 Dr. Maryam Bashir Information Technology Lahore College for Women University PhD 3406 Dr. Maryam Ishaq Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3407 Dr. Maryam Ishaq Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3408 Dr. Maryam Jabeen Social Sciences Institute of Management Sciences PhD 3409 Dr. Maryam Liaqat Engineering Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3410 Maryam Naveed 3411 Dr. Maryam Sadiq Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 3412 Dr. Maryam Saleem Multidisciplinary The University of Faisalabad PhD 3413 Dr. Maryam Siddiqa Mathematics & Statistics International Islamic University PhD 3414 Dr. Maryam Zain Biological Sciences The Women University PhD 3415 Dr. Maryiam Javed Physics Institute of Space Technology PhD 3416 Dr. Maryum Bibi Information Technology University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 3417 Dr. Mashooque Ali Talpur Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3418 Dr. Masood Ahmad Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3419 Dr. Masood Khan Mathematics & Statistics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3420 Dr. Masood Nawaz Kalyar Social Sciences Government College University PhD 3421 Dr. Masood Ul Hassan Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3422 Dr. Masooma Irfan Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3423 Dr. Masroor Ahmed Abro Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3424 Dr. Masroor Hussain Information Technology Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 3425 Dr. Massab Umair Biological Sciences National Institute of Health (NIH) PhD 3426 Dr. Mati Ur Rehman Health Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 3427 Dr. Matiullah Khan Physics Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 3428 Dr. Matiullah Shah Physics University of Wah PhD 3429 Dr. Matloob Ahmad Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 3430 Dr. Mattiullah Butt Social Sciences National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 3431 Dr. Mazhar Abbas Social Sciences Government College University PhD 3432 Dr. Mazhar Ali Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 3433 Dr. Mazhar Ali Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3434 Dr. Mazhar Ali Dootio Information Technology Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University Lyari PhD 3435 Dr. Mazhar Amjad Gilani Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3436 Dr. Mazhar Hussain Mathematics & Statistics National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 3437 Dr. Mazhar Hussain Baloch Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3438 Dr. Mazhar Hussain Choudhary Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3439 Dr. Mazhar Iqbal Environmental Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3440 Mr. Mazhar Iqbal Social Sciences Foundation University MPhil 3441 Dr. Mazhar Rafique Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 3442 Dr. Mazloom Shah Chemical Sciences Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 3443 Meh Jabeen 3444 Mehak Riaz Mehak Riaz 3445 Dr. Mehak Usmani Information Technology Iqra University (North Campus) PhD 3446 Dr. Mehar Ali Malik Mathematics & Statistics Riphah International University PhD 3447 Dr. Mehboob Ahmed Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3448 Dr. Mehboob Alam Engineering Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 3449 Dr. Mehboob Alam Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3450 Dr. Mehboob Hassan Chemical Sciences University of Narowal PhD 3451 Dr. Mehboob ur Rahman Agricultural Sciences NIBGE Agricultural Biotechnology Division, PAEC PhD 3452 Dr. Mehboob ur Rahman Agricultural Sciences NIBGE Agricultural Biotechnology Division, PAEC PhD 3453 Dr. Mehboob ur Rahman Agricultural Sciences NIBGE Agricultural Biotechnology Division, PAEC PhD 3454 Dr. Mehdi Hassan Chemical Sciences University of Baltistan PhD 3455 Dr. Mehdi Hussain Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3456 Dr. Mehdi Maqbool Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 3457 Dr. Meher Ali Chemical Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 3458 Dr. Mehfooz Ullah Social Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 3459 Dr. Mehmood Ali Environmental Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3460 Dr. Mehmood Hussain Social Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 3461 Dr. Mehmooda Munazir Biological Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 3462 Dr. Mehr Un Nisa Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3463 Dr. Mehr Un Nisa Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3464 Dr. Mehrab Khan Earth Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 3465 Dr. Mehran Idris Khan Social Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 3466 Mehran Khan 3467 Dr. Mehran Ullah Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3468 Dr. Mehreen Fatima Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3469 Dr. Mehreen Fatima Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3470 Dr. Mehreen Khan Environmental Sciences Lahore School of Economics PhD 3471 Dr. Mehreen Riaz Biological Sciences Women University PhD 3472 Dr. Mehrin Sherazi Biological Sciences Abasyn University PhD 3473 Dr. Mehrunisa Memon Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3474 Dr. Mehtab Afzal Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3475 Dr. Mehtab Afzal Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3476 Dr. Mehtab Alam Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3477 Dr. Mehvish Naz Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 3478 Dr. Mehwash Zia Chemical Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 3479 Dr. Mehwish Bari Mathematics & Statistics National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 3480 Dr. Mehwish Faheem Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 3481 Dr. Mehwish Iqtedar Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 3482 Dr. Mehwish Jamil Noor Biological Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 3483 Dr. Mehwish Maqbool Biological Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 3484 Dr. Memoon Sajid Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 3485 Dr. Mian Abdul Hafeez Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3486 Dr. Mian Ahmad Jan Information Technology Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3487 Dr. Mian Akif Safeen Physics University of the Poonch PhD 3488 Dr. Mian Anjum Murtaza Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3489 Dr. Mian Anjum Murtaza Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3490 Dr. Mian Habib Ur Rahman Mahmood Chemical Sciences University of Education PhD 3491 Dr. Mian Hasnain Nawaz Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3492 Dr. MIAN ISHAQ AHMAD Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3493 Dr. Mian Kamran Sharif Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3494 Dr. Mian Muhammad Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3495 Dr. Mian Muhammad Atif Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 3496 Dr. Mian Muhammad Haris Aslam Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3497 Dr. Mian Muhammad Waseem Iqbal Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3498 Dr. Mian Noor Hussain Asghar Ali Samon Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3499 Dr. Mian Usman Sattar Social Sciences Beaconhouse National University PhD 3500 Mian Waleed Ahmed 3501 Dr. Minhaj Ahmad Khan Information Technology Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3502 Dr. Minhoon Khan Laghari Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 3503 Dr. Mir Aftab Hussain Talpur Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3504 Dr. Mir Azam Khan Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3505 Dr. Mir Hamayoun Yousaf Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 3506 Dr. Mir Hassan Khoso Biological Sciences Shaheed Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto Medical University PhD 3507 Dr. Mir Muhammad Nasir Qayyum Agricultural Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 3508 Dr. Mir Muhammad Shah Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 3509 Dr. Mir Sadiq Shah Biological Sciences University of Science & Technology PhD 3510 Dr. Mir Yasir Umair Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3511 Dr. Mirza Abbas Social Sciences Agriculture Department PhD 3512 Dr. Mirza Abid Mehmood Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 3513 Dr. Mirza Amin ul Haq Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 3514 Dr. Mirza Arfan Yawer Chemical Sciences University of Education (Dera Ghazi Khan Campus) PhD 3515 Dr. Mirza Ashfaq Ahmed Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3516 Dr. Mirza Mubasher Baig Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 3517 Dr. Mirza Muhammad Ali Baig Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3518 Dr. Mirza Naveed Shahzad Mathematics & Statistics University of Gujrat PhD 3519 Dr. Mirza Nouman Ali Talib Social Sciences National Defense University PhD 3520 Dr. Mirza Omer Beg Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3521 Dr. Mirza Tariq Hamayun Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3522 Dr. Mirza Tasawer Baig Chemical Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 3523 Ms. Misbah Ahmed Health Sciences Hamdard University MPhil 3524 Dr. Misbah Arshad Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) PhD 3525 Dr. Misbah Hussain Biological Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3526 Dr. Misbah Mirza Physics The Women University PhD 3527 Dr. Mishal Hasnain Naqvi Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3528 Dr. Miskeen Ali Gopang Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3529 Dr. Moafia Nader Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 3530 Dr. MOATER IFTIKHAR Health Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 3531 Dr. Moazama Batool Biological Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 3532 Dr. Moazur Rahman Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3533 Dr. Moazzam Islam Tiwana Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3534 Dr. MOAZZAM TANVEER Social Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 3535 Dr. Mobeen Ul Islam Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3536 Dr. Mobina Ulfat Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 3537 Dr. Moeen ud din Tariq Engineering Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 3538 Dr. Mohammad Adil Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3539 Dr. Mohammad Akmal Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3540 Dr. Mohammad Alam Saeed Physics University of Education PhD 3541 Dr. Mohammad Altaf Mukati Engineering Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 3542 Dr. Mohammad Ashraf Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3543 Dr. Mohammad Attaullah Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3544 Dr. Mohammad Ayaz Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3545 Dr. Mohammad Danish Mehmood Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3546 Dr. Mohammad Danish Mehmood Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3547 Dr. Mohammad Daud Ali Social Sciences University of Haripur PhD 3548 Mohammad Ejaz 3549 Dr. Mohammad Faisal Information Technology University of Malakand PhD 3550 Dr. Mohammad Fayaz Social Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3551 Dr. Mohammad Hanif Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3552 Dr. Mohammad Haroon Khan Biological Sciences City University of Science and Information Technology PhD 3553 Dr. Mohammad Ilyas Information Technology University of Malakand PhD 3554 Dr. Mohammad Imran Information Technology Air University PhD 3555 Dr. Mohammad Imran Younus Health Sciences Rawalpindi Medical University PhD 3556 Dr. Mohammad Islam Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 3557 Dr. Mohammad Maroof Shah Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3558 Dr. Mohammad Maroof Shah Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3559 Dr. Mohammad Nadeem Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 3560 Dr. Mohammad Nafees Environmental Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3561 Mohammad Naseer 3562 Dr. Mohammad Nisar Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3563 Dr. Mohammad Pervez Mughal Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3564 Dr. Mohammad Saleem Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3565 Dr. Mohammad Saleem Akhtar Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3566 Mohammad Saleem Zafar 3567 Dr. Mohammad Sardaraz Information Technology COMSATS University (Attock Campus) PhD 3568 Dr. Mohammad Shafi Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3569 Dr. Mohammad Shaiq Social Sciences Greenwich University PhD 3570 Dr. Mohammad Shoaib Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3571 Dr. Mohammad Sohail Chemical Sciences University of Swat PhD 3572 Dr. Mohammad Sohail Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3573 Dr. Mohammad Sohail Yunis Social Sciences Institute of Management Sciences PhD 3574 Dr. Mohammad Tahir Waheed Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3575 Dr. Mohammad Talib Kalhoro Agricultural Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3576 Dr. Mohammad Tariq Rahim Mathematics & Statistics Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 3577 Dr. Mohammad Zafar Earth Sciences Bahria University PhD 3578 Dr. Mohib Shah Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3579 Dr. Mohib Ullah Engineering Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3580 Dr. Mohib Ullah Khan Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3581 Dr. Mohib Ullah Khan Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3582 Dr. Mohib Ur Rahman Social Sciences University of Buner PhD 3583 Dr. Mohibullah Shah Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3584 Dr. Mohsan Hassan Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3585 Dr. Mohsan Jelani Physics University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 3586 Dr. Mohsan Nawaz Chemical Sciences Hazara University PhD 3587 Dr. Mohsen Ali Engineering Sciences Information Technology University of the Punjab PhD 3588 Dr. Mohsin Abbas Environmental Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3589 Dr. Mohsin Abbas Khan Chemical Sciences Islamia University PhD 3590 Dr. Mohsin Ahmad Khan Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3591 Dr. Mohsin Ali Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 3592 Dr. Mohsin Ali Marwat Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 3593 Dr. Mohsin Ali Memon Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3594 Dr. Mohsin Ashraf Information Technology University of Central Punjab PhD 3595 Dr. Mohsin Atta Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3596 Dr. Mohsin Hassan Khan Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3597 Dr. Mohsin Islam Tiwana Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3598 Dr. Mohsin Jamil Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3599 Dr. Mohsin Javed Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3600 Dr. Mohsin Kamal Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Peshawar Campus) PhD 3601 Dr. Mohsin Kazmi Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3602 Dr. Mohsin Khurshid Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 3603 Dr. Mohsin Nawaz Engineering Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 3604 Dr. Mohsin Nawaz Biological Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 3605 Dr. Mohsin Rafique Physics Government College University PhD 3606 Dr. Mohsin Shah Biological Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 3607 Dr. Mohsin Siddique Chemical Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 3608 Dr. Mohsin Tariq Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 3609 Dr. Mohsin Tassawar Cheema Biological Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 3610 Dr. Mohsin Wahid Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 3611 Dr. Mohtashim Mansoor Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3612 Dr. Moin Ahmad Moon Social Sciences Air University (Multan Campus) PhD 3613 Dr. Moin ud Din Junjua Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 3614 Dr. Moina Akhtar Moghal Chemical Sciences University of Sindh PhD 3615 Dr. Moiz ud Din Khan Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3616 Dr. Momin Khan Chemical Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3617 Dr. Momina Hussain Biological Sciences University of Okara PhD 3618 Dr. Moneeza Abbas Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 3619 Dr. Mool Chand Malhi Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 3620 Dr. Mozaffer Rahim Hingorjo Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 3621 Dr. Muahmmad Usman Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3622 Dr. Muawuz Ijaz Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 3623 Dr. Muazzam Ali Khan Biological Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 3624 Dr. Mubarik Mahmood Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 3625 Dr. Mubashar Hassan Zia Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 3626 Dr. Mubashar Hussain Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3627 Dr. Mubasher Hassan Biological Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3628 Dr. Mubasher Hassan Biological Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3629 Prof. Mubasher Malik Information Technology Institute of Southern Punjab PhD 3630 Dr. Mubashir Ali Khan Social Sciences Bahria University (Karachi Campus) PhD 3631 Dr. Mubashir Ali Siddiqui Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3632 Dr. Mubashir Aziz Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 3633 Dr. Mubashir Gulzar Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3634 Dr. Mubashir Mehdi Social Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3635 Dr. Mubashir Qayyum Mathematics & Statistics National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Peshawar Campus) PhD 3636 Dr. Mubashrah Munir Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3637 Dr. Mubbashar Hassan Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 3638 Dr. Mubbashar Saddique Information Technology University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3639 Dr. Mubeen Sarwar Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3640 Dr. Mubeen Sarwar Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3641 Dr. Mubshar Hussain Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3642 Dr. Mudaser Javaid Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 3643 Dr. Mudaser Ullah Engineering Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3644 Dr. Mudasir Ahmed Memon Engineering Sciences University of Sindh PhD 3645 Dr. Mudassar Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3646 Dr. Mudassar Ali Social Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 3647 Dr. Mudassar Aslam Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3648 Dr. Mudassar Hasan Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3649 Dr. Mudassar Hasan Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3650 Dr. Mudassar Iqbal Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3651 Dr. Mudassar Iqbal Chemical Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3652 Dr. Mudassar Iqbal Arain Chemical Sciences University of Sindh PhD 3653 Dr. Mudassar Mohi Ud Din Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 3654 Dr. Mudassar Nawaz Khan Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 3655 Dr. Mudassar Nazar Mathematics & Statistics Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3656 Dr. Mudassar Rashid Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3657 Dr. Mudassar Raza Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 3658 Dr. Mudasser Naseer Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 3659 Dr. Mudasser Naseer Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3660 Dr. Mudassir Husnain Social Sciences University of Education (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 3661 Dr. Mudassir Hussain Social Sciences University of Lakki Marwat PhD 3662 Dr. Mudassir Mukhtar Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 3663 Dr. Mudassir Shabbir Information Technology Information Technology University of the Punjab PhD 3664 Dr. Muddasar Ghani Khwaja Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 3665 Muddasir Khan 3666 Dr. Muddassar Azam Sindhu Information Technology Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3667 Dr. Muddassar Zafar Biological Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3668 Dr. Muddassir Ali Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3669 Dr. Mudeer Ahmed Khattak Social Sciences Iqra University PhD 3670 Dr. Mudssar Ali Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 3671 Dr. Mueen Alam Khan Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 3672 Dr. Mueen Uddin Engineering Sciences IndusUniversity PhD 3673 Dr. Muftooh Ur Rehman Siddiqi Engineering Sciences CECOS University of Information Technology & Emerging Sciences PhD 3674 Dr. Mughal Qayum Chemical Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 3675 Dr. Mughees Aizaz Alvi Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3676 Dr. Muhabat Khan Social Sciences University of Loralai PhD 3677 Dr. Muhamamd Amjad Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 3678 Dr. Muhamamd Sajjad Social Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 3679 Dr. Muhamma Naveed Iqbal Raja Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3680 Dr. Muhammad Afzal Biological Sciences Riphah International University PhD 3681 Dr. Muhammad Ajaz Un Nabi Physics Government College University PhD 3682 Dr. Muhammad Anwar Ul Haq Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3683 Dr. Muhammad Jawad Social Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 3684 Dr. Muhammad Aamer Maqsood Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3685 Dr. Muhammad Aamir Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3686 Dr. Muhammad Aamir Engineering Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3687 Dr. Muhammad Aamir Chemical Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 3688 Dr. Muhammad Aamir Mathematics & Statistics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3689 Dr. Muhammad Aamir Javed Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 3690 Dr. Muhammad Abaid Ullah Biological Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 3691 Dr. Muhammad Abbas Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3692 Dr. Muhammad Abbas Chemical Sciences Riphah International University PhD 3693 Dr. Muhammad Abbas Social Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 3694 Dr. Muhammad Abbas Social Sciences Air University (Multan Campus) PhD 3695 Dr. Muhammad Abdul Rehman Rashid Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 3696 Dr. Muhammad Abdullah Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Lahore Campus) PhD 3697 Dr. Muhammad Abid Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) PhD 3698 Dr. Muhammad Abid Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 3699 Dr. Muhammad Abid Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3700 Dr. Muhammad Abid Rashid Chemical Sciences University of Education (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 3701 Dr. Muhammad Abrar Social Sciences Government College University PhD 3702 Dr. Muhammad Abrar Physics Hazara University PhD 3703 Dr. Muhammad Abrar Ul Haq Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3704 Dr. Muhammad Abrar Ul Haq Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3705 Dr. Muhammad Abrar Zahoor Social Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3706 Dr. Muhammad Abu Bakr Engineering Sciences National University of Technology (NUTECH) PhD 3707 Dr. Muhammad Adeel Ahmed Pasha Engineering Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 3708 Muhammad Adil 3709 Dr. Muhammad Adil Chemical Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 3710 Dr. Muhammad Adil Biological Sciences Qurtaba University of Science & Information Technology PhD 3711 Dr. Muhammad Adnan Social Sciences National College of Business Administration & Economics PhD 3712 Dr. Muhammad Adnan Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 3713 Dr. Muhammad Adnan Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3714 Mr. Muhammad Adnan Mathematics & Statistics Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC) MPhil 3715 Dr. Muhammad Adnan Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3716 Muhammad Adnan Iqbal 3717 Dr. Muhammad Adnan Kanpurwala Biological Sciences Karachi Institute of Medical Sciences/ KIMS PhD 3718 Dr. Muhammad Adnan Maqbool Social Sciences University of Education (Attock Campus) PhD 3719 Dr. Muhammad Adnan Shan Biological Sciences University of the Punjab (Allama Iqbal Campus/Old Campus) PhD 3720 Dr. Muhammad Aftab Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3721 Dr. Muhammad Afzaal Environmental Sciences Government College University PhD 3722 Dr. Muhammad Afzaal Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 3723 Dr. Muhammad Afzal Mathematics & Statistics University of Education PhD 3724 Dr. Muhammad Afzal Biological Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 3725 Dr. Muhammad Afzal Agricultural Sciences Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 3726 Dr. Muhammad Afzal Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3727 Dr. Muhammad Afzal Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3728 Dr. Muhammad Ahmad Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3729 Dr. Muhammad Ahmad Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3730 Dr. Muhammad Ahmad Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 3731 Mr. Muhammad Ahmad Engineering Sciences Minhaj University MPhil 3732 Dr. Muhammad Ahmed Social Sciences Bahria University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3733 Dr. Muhammad Ahmed Abdullah Health Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 3734 Dr. Muhammad Ahsan Mathematics & Statistics University of Swabi PhD 3735 Dr. Muhammad Ahsan Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 3736 Muhammad Ahsan Shafique 3737 Dr. Muhammad Ajaib Biological Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 3738 Dr. Muhammad Ajmal Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3739 Dr. Muhammad Ajmier Social Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 3740 Dr. Muhammad Akbar Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 3741 Dr. Muhammad Akhlaq Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 3742 Dr. Muhammad Akhtar Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3743 Dr. Muhammad Akhtar Chemical Sciences Islamia University PhD 3744 Dr. Muhammad Akhtar Health Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3745 Dr. Muhammad Akhtar Health Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3746 Dr. Muhammad Akmal Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3747 Dr. Muhammad Akmal Engineering Sciences Riphah International University PhD 3748 Dr. Muhammad Akram Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 3749 Dr. Muhammad Akram Mathematics & Statistics University of the Punjab PhD 3750 Dr. Muhammad Akram Engineering Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 3751 Dr. Muhammad Akram Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 3752 Dr. Muhammad Akram Naseem Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3753 Dr. Muhammad Akram Naseem Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3754 Dr. Muhammad Aleem Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3755 Dr. Muhammad Aleem Social Sciences CECOS University of Information Technology & Emerging Sciences PhD 3756 Dr. Muhammad Ali Biological Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 3757 Dr. Muhammad Ali Mathematics & Statistics National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3758 Dr. Muhammad Ali Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3759 Dr. Muhammad Ali Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3760 Dr. Muhammad Ali Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3761 Dr. Muhammad Ali Engineering Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 3762 Dr. Muhammad Ali Mathematics & Statistics Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 3763 Dr. Muhammad Ali Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3764 Muhammad Ali 3765 Dr. Muhammad Ali Earth Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3766 Dr. Muhammad Ali Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3767 Dr. Muhammad Ali Biological Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3768 Dr. Muhammad Ali Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3769 Mr. Muhammad Ali Noman Engineering Sciences IndusUniversity Masters 3770 Muhammad Ali Syed 3771 Dr. Muhammad Altaf Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 3772 Dr. Muhammad Altaf Mathematics & Statistics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3773 Dr. Muhammad Ameen Agricultural Sciences Kohsar University PhD 3774 Dr. Muhammad Amer Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3775 Dr. Muhammad Amer Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3776 Dr. Muhammad Amin Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 3777 Dr. Muhammad Amin Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 3778 Dr. Muhammad Amin Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 3779 Dr. Muhammad Amin Social Sciences University of Education PhD 3780 Dr. Muhammad Amir Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3781 Dr. Muhammad Amjad Engineering Sciences Riphah International University PhD 3782 Muhammad Amjad 3783 Mr. Muhammad Amjad Environmental Sciences Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC) MPhil 3784 Dr. Muhammad Anis Ur Rehman Physics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3785 Dr. Muhammad Ansar Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3786 Dr. Muhammad Ansar Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3787 Dr. Muhammad Anwar Information Technology University of Education PhD 3788 Dr. Muhammad Anwar Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 3789 Dr. MUHAMMAD ANWAR UL HAQ Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3790 Dr. Muhammad Aqeel Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Space Technology PhD 3791 Dr. Muhammad Aqib Information Technology Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3792 Dr. Muhammad Aqil Engineering Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 3793 Dr. Muhammad Arfan Biological Sciences University of Education (Vehari Campus) PhD 3794 Dr. Muhammad Arif Information Technology University of Lahore PhD 3795 Dr. Muhammad Arif Information Technology University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3796 Dr. Muhammad Arif Social Sciences University of Swabi PhD 3797 Dr. Muhammad Arif Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 3798 Dr. Muhammad Arif Engineering Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 3799 Dr. Muhammad Arif Engineering Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3800 Dr. Muhammad Arif Ali Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3801 Dr. Muhammad Arif Ali Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3802 Dr. Muhammad Arsalan Nazir Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 3803 Mr. Muhammad Arsalan Raza Information Technology Lahore Garrison University MPhil 3804 Dr. Muhammad Arshad Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3805 Dr. Muhammad Arshad Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3806 Dr. Muhammad Arshad Biological Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3807 Dr. Muhammad Arshad Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 3808 Dr. Muhammad Arshad Information Technology City University of Science and Information Technology PhD 3809 Dr. Muhammad Arshad Agricultural Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 3810 Dr. Muhammad Arshad Environmental Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3811 Mr. Muhammad Arshad Javid Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University MPhil 3812 Dr. Muhammad Asfand e Yar Information Technology Bahria University PhD 3813 Dr. Muhammad Ashfaq Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3814 Dr. MUHAMMAD ASHFAQ Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3815 Dr. Muhammad Ashfaq Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3816 Dr. Muhammad Ashfaq Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 3817 Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 3818 Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Social Sciences Emaan Institute of Management & Sciences PhD 3819 Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 3820 Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Mathematics & Statistics University of Sargodha PhD 3821 Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3822 Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Information Technology Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 3823 Dr. Muhammad Asif Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3824 Dr. Muhammad Asif Social Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3825 Dr. Muhammad Asif Engineering Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 3826 Dr. Muhammad Asif Social Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3827 Dr. Muhammad Asif Physics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3828 Dr. Muhammad Asif Engineering Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3829 Dr. Muhammad Asif Mathematics & Statistics University of Peshawar PhD 3830 Dr. Muhammad Asif Mathematics & Statistics University of Management & Technology PhD 3831 Dr. Muhammad Asif Mathematics & Statistics University of Malakand PhD 3832 Dr. Muhammad Asif Social Sciences City University of Science and Information Technology PhD 3833 Dr. Muhammad Asif Information Technology Lahore Garrison University PhD 3834 Dr. Muhammad Asif Information Technology Lahore Garrison University PhD 3835 Dr. Muhammad Asif Chemical Sciences Islamia University PhD 3836 Dr. Muhammad Asif Information Technology National Textile University PhD 3837 Dr. Muhammad Asif Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3838 Dr. Muhammad Asif Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 3839 Dr. Muhammad Asif Mathematics & Statistics Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3840 Dr. Muhammad Asif Khan Social Sciences University of Swabi PhD 3841 Dr. Muhammad Asim Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3842 Dr. Muhammad Asim Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3843 Dr. Muhammad Asim Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3844 Dr. Muhammad Asim Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3845 Dr. Muhammad Aslam Chemical Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 3846 Dr. Muhammad Aslam Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3847 Dr. Muhammad Aslam Information Technology University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3848 Dr. Muhammad Asrar Ul Haq Social Sciences COMSATS University (Sahiwal Campus) PhD 3849 Dr. Muhammad Asshad Engineering Sciences University of Haripur PhD 3850 Dr. Muhammad Ateeq Chemical Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3851 Dr. Muhammad Athar Engineering Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3852 MUHAMMAD ATHAR IQBAL 3853 Prof. Muhammad Atif Physics Air University PhD 3854 Dr. Muhammad Atif Chemical Sciences University of Education (Vehari Campus) PhD 3855 Dr. Muhammad Atif Information Technology University of Lahore PhD 3856 Dr. Muhammad Atif Information Technology University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3857 Dr. Muhammad Atif Mathematics & Statistics University of Peshawar PhD 3858 Dr. Muhammad Atif Niaz Engineering Sciences University of Wah PhD 3859 Mr. Muhammad Atif Qaim Khani Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology Masters 3860 Dr. Muhammad Atiq Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3861 Dr. Muhammad Awais Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 3862 Dr. Muhammad Awais Engineering Sciences Government College University PhD 3863 Dr. Muhammad Awais Engineering Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3864 Muhammad Awais Gondal 3865 Dr. Muhammad Ayaz Chemical Sciences University of Malakand PhD 3866 Dr. Muhammad Ayaz Social Sciences University of Lakki Marwat PhD 3867 Dr. Muhammad Ayaz Mathematics & Statistics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3868 Dr. Muhammad Ayub Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 3869 Dr. Muhammad Ayub Mathematics & Statistics HITEC University PhD 3870 Dr. Muhammad Ayyoob Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 3871 Dr. Muhammad Ayyoub Social Sciences University of Sahiwal PhD 3872 Dr. Muhammad Azam Mathematics & Statistics University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3873 Dr. Muhammad Azam Mathematics & Statistics University of Education PhD 3874 Dr. Muhammad Azam Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 3875 Dr. Muhammad Azam Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3876 Dr. Muhammad Azam Engineering Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3877 Dr. Muhammad Azam Khan Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3878 Dr. Muhammad Azeem Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3879 Dr. Muhammad Azeem Information Technology University of Sialkot PhD 3880 Dr. Muhammad Azeem Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3881 Dr. Muhammad Azhar Iqbal Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 3882 Dr. Muhammad Azim Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3883 Dr. Muhammad Azmat Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3884 Dr. Muhammad Baber Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3885 Dr. Muhammad Baber Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3886 Dr. Muhammad Badar Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 3887 Dr. Muhammad Badaruddin Biological Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3888 Dr. Muhammad Balal Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3889 Dr. Muhammad Bilal Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 3890 Dr. Muhammad Bilal Environmental Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3891 Dr. Muhammad Bilal Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 3892 Dr. Muhammad Bilal Majid Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3893 Dr. Muhammad Bilal Majid Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3894 Dr. Muhammad Binyameen Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3895 Dr. Muhammad Chattha Agricultural Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3896 Dr. Muhammad Danish Chemical Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3897 Dr. Muhammad Dawood Earth Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 3898 Dr. Muhammad Ehatisham Ul Haq Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 3899 Dr. Muhammad Ehsan Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 3900 Dr. Muhammad Fahad Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3901 Dr. Muhammad Fahad Ullah Earth Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 3902 Dr. Muhammad Faheem Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3903 Dr. Muhammad Faheem Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3904 Dr. Muhammad Faheem Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3905 Dr. Muhammad Faheem Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3906 Dr. Muhammad Fahim Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 3907 Dr. Muhammad Fahim Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3908 Dr. Muhammad Fahim Abbas Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 3909 Mr. MUHAMMAD FAISAL GULZAR Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 3910 Mr. MUHAMMAD FAISAL GULZAR Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 3911 Dr. Muhammad Farhan Ayaz Chishti Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3912 Dr. Muhammad Farhan Ul Haque Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 3913 Dr. Muhammad Farman Mathematics & Statistics Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 3914 Dr. Muhammad Farooq Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 3915 Dr. Muhammad Farooq Mathematics & Statistics University of Peshawar PhD 3916 Dr. Muhammad Farooq Biological Sciences University of Swabi PhD 3917 Dr. Muhammad Farooq Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3918 Dr. Muhammad Farooq Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3919 Dr. Muhammad Farooq Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Jhang Campus) PhD 3920 Muhammad Farooq 3921 Dr. Muhammad Farooq Mathematics & Statistics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3922 Dr. Muhammad Farrukh Saleem Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3923 Dr. Muhammad Faryad Engineering Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 3924 Dr. Muhammad Fayyaz Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 3925 Dr. Muhammad Fiaz Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 3926 Mr. Muhammad Fiaz Majeed Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 3927 Mr. Muhammad Fiaz Majeed Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 3928 Dr. Muhammad Furqan Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 3929 Dr. Muhammad Furqan Ali Engineering Sciences University of Karachi PhD 3930 Dr. Muhammad Habib Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 3931 Dr. Muhammad Hafeez ur Rehman Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3932 Dr. Muhammad Hafeez ur Rehman Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3933 Dr. Muhammad Hafeez ur Rehman Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3934 Dr. Muhammad Hamayun Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3935 Dr. Muhammad Hamayun Social Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 3936 Dr. Muhammad Hamid Information Technology University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 3937 Dr. Muhammad Haneef Engineering Sciences Foundation University PhD 3938 Dr. Muhammad Hanif Information Technology Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 3939 Dr. Muhammad Hanif Mathematics & Statistics University of Narowal PhD 3940 Dr. Muhammad Hanif Earth Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 3941 Dr. Muhammad Hanif Chemical Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3942 Dr. Muhammad Haris Social Sciences NFC Institute of Engineering & Technology PhD 3943 Prof. Muhammad Haris Ramzan Health Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 3944 Mr. Muhammad Haroon Engineering Sciences University of Wah MPhil 3945 Mr. Muhammad Haseeb Rabbani Information Technology University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir Masters 3946 Mr. Muhammad Haseeb Shakil Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 3947 Mr. Muhammad Haseeb Shakil Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 3948 Dr. Muhammad Hashim Social Sciences National Textile University PhD 3949 Mr. Muhammad Hasnain Information Technology Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF) Masters 3950 Dr. Muhammad Hasnat Chemical Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3951 Dr. Muhammad Hassan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3952 Dr. Muhammad Hassan Chemical Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 3953 Mr. Muhammad Hassan Abbasi Multidisciplinary Dawood University of Engineering & Technology MPhil 3954 Dr. Muhammad Hatim Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3955 Dr. Muhammad Hatim Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3956 Dr. Muhammad Hussain Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 3957 Dr. Muhammad Ibrahim Agricultural Sciences University of Swabi PhD 3958 Dr. Muhammad Ibrahim Environmental Sciences University of Okara PhD 3959 Dr. Muhammad Ibrahim Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 3960 Dr. Muhammad Ibrahim Mathematics & Statistics Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 3961 Dr. Muhammad Ibrahim Mathematics & Statistics CECOS University of Information Technology & Emerging Sciences PhD 3962 Dr. Muhammad Ibrar Mathematics & Statistics University of Science & Technology PhD 3963 Dr. Muhammad Ibrar Ul Haque Engineering Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3964 Dr. Muhammad Idrees Mathematics & Statistics The Islamia College PhD 3965 Muhammad Idrees 3966 Dr. Muhammad Idris Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3967 Dr. Muhammad Ijaz Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3968 Dr. Muhammad Ijaz Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3969 Dr. Muhammad Ijaz Mathematics & Statistics University of Haripur PhD 3970 Dr. Muhammad Ikram Chemical Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3971 Dr. Muhammad Ikram Physics Government College University PhD 3972 Dr. Muhammad Ikram Chemical Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 3973 Dr. Muhammad Ilyas Agricultural Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3974 Dr. Muhammad Ilyas Physics Gomal University PhD 3975 Dr. Muhammad Ilyas Abro Physics Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3976 Dr. Muhammad Ilyas Fakhir Information Technology Government College University PhD 3977 Dr. Muhammad Imdad Ullah Mathematics & Statistics Ghazi University PhD 3978 Dr. Muhammad Imran Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 3979 Dr. Muhammad Imran Engineering Sciences International Islamic University PhD 3980 Dr. Muhammad Imran Social Sciences Government College University PhD 3981 Dr. Muhammad Imran Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 3982 Dr. Muhammad imran Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 3983 Dr. Muhammad Imran Information Technology The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 3984 Dr. Muhammad Imran Engineering Sciences Sir Syed University of Engineering & Technology PhD 3985 Dr. Muhammad Imran Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 3986 Dr. Muhammad Imran Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3987 Dr. Muhammad Imran Physics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 3988 Dr. Muhammad Imran Engineering Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 3989 Dr. Muhammad Imran Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 3990 Dr. Muhammad Imran Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 3991 Dr. Muhammad Imran Engineering Sciences National Centre for Physics (NCP) PhD 3992 Dr. Muhammad Imran Chemical Sciences Iqra University (Islamabad Campus) PhD 3993 Dr. Muhammad Imran Environmental Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 3994 Dr. Muhammad Imran Social Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 3995 Dr. Muhammad Imran Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore PhD 3996 Dr. Muhammad Imran Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 3997 Dr. Muhammad Imran Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 3998 Dr. Muhammad Imran Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 3999 Dr. Muhammad Imran Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 4000 Dr. Muhammad Imran Arshad Physics Government College University PhD 4001 Muhammad Imran Arshad 4002 Dr. Muhammad Imran Sajid Biological Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 4003 Dr. Muhammad Imranullah Social Sciences Abasyn University PhD 4004 Dr. Muhammad Imtiaz Agricultural Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4005 Dr. Muhammad Imtiaz Physics The Islamia College PhD 4006 Dr. Muhammad Inam ul Haq Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4007 Dr. Muhammad Iqbal Mathematics & Statistics Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 4008 Dr. Muhammad Iqbal Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4009 Dr. Muhammad Iqbal Engineering Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 4010 Dr. Muhammad Iqbal Chemical Sciences Gomal University PhD 4011 Dr. Muhammad Iqbal Social Sciences University of Education PhD 4012 Dr. Muhammad Iqbal Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Wah Campus) PhD 4013 Dr. Muhammad Iqbal Chemical Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 4014 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4015 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4016 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Biological Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4017 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Social Sciences University of Education PhD 4018 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4019 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Engineering Sciences National Textile University PhD 4020 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 4021 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4022 Dr. Muhammad Irfan Akram Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 4023 Dr. Muhammad Irshad Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4024 Dr. Muhammad Irshad Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 4025 Dr. Muhammad Irshad Agricultural Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4026 Dr. Muhammad Irshad Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4027 Dr. Muhammad Ishaq Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4028 Dr. Muhammad Ishaq Information Technology The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 4029 Dr. Muhammad Ishfaq Social Sciences Minhaj University PhD 4030 Dr. Muhammad Ishfaq Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4031 Dr. Muhammad Ishtiaq Biological Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 4032 Dr. Muhammad Ismail Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 4033 Prof. Muhammad Ismail Chemical Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 4034 Dr. Muhammad Israr Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 4035 Dr. Muhammad Israr Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 4036 Dr. Muhammad Israr Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4037 Dr. Muhammad Jafar Jaskani Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4038 Dr. Muhammad Jaffar Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4039 Dr. Muhammad Jahangir Health Sciences University of Haripur PhD 4040 Dr. Muhammad Jahangir Health Sciences University of Haripur PhD 4041 Dr. Muhammad Jamil Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 4042 Dr. Muhammad Jamil Mathematics & Statistics NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4043 Dr. Muhammad Jamil Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 4044 Dr. Muhammad Jamil Biological Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 4045 Dr. Muhammad Jamil Khan Social Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 4046 Dr. Muhammad Jaskani Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4047 Dr. Muhammad Javed Physics University of Malakand PhD 4048 Dr. Muhammad Javed Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 4049 Dr. Muhammad Jilani Information Technology Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology PhD 4050 Dr. Muhammad Junaid Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration PhD 4051 Dr. Muhammad Kabir Biological Sciences University of Haripur PhD 4052 Dr. Muhammad Kabir Information Technology University of Management & Technology PhD 4053 Dr. Muhammad Kabir Biological Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4054 Dr. Muhammad Kahshan Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 4055 Dr. Muhammad Kahshan Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 4056 Dr. Muhammad Kaleem Health Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 4057 Dr. Muhammad Kaleem Social Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 4058 Dr. Muhammad Kamil Lakho Social Sciences Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 4059 Dr. Muhammad Kamran Social Sciences University of Loralai PhD 4060 Dr. Muhammad Kamran Engineering Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4061 Prof. Muhammad Kamran Azim Biological Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 4062 Muhammad kamran khan 4063 Dr. Muhammad Kamran Khan Engineering Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 4064 Dr. Muhammad Kasheer Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 4065 Dr. Muhammad Kashif Earth Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4066 Dr. Muhammad Kashif Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 4067 Dr. Muhammad Kashif Engineering Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 4068 Dr. Muhammad KASHIF Ilyas Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 4069 Muhammad Kashif Iqbal Khan 4070 Dr. Muhammad Kashif Saleemi Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4071 Dr. Muhammad Khalid Mansoor Agricultural Sciences Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences PhD 4072 Mr. Muhammad Khalid Shaikh Information Technology Mohammad Ali Jinnah University MPhil 4073 Dr. Muhammad Khalil Ur Rehman Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4074 Dr. Muhammad Khan Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 4075 Dr. Muhammad Khan Social Sciences Hazara University PhD 4076 Dr. Muhammad Khan Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4077 Dr. Muhammad Khan Social Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 4078 Muhammad Khawaja Hassan Nizami 4079 Dr. Muhammad Khisroon Biological Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 4080 Dr. Muhammad Khurram Engineering Sciences COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 4081 Dr. Muhammad Khurram Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4082 Dr. Muhammad Khurram Chemical Sciences Abasyn University PhD 4083 Dr. Muhammad Khurshid Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4084 Dr. Muhammad Kifayatullah Chemical Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 4085 Dr. Muhammad Latif Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 4086 Prof. Muhammad Mahabat Khan Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4087 Dr. Muhammad Malik Social Sciences University of Education PhD 4088 Dr. Muhammad Mateen Engineering Sciences Air University (Multan Campus) PhD 4089 Dr. Muhammad Mazhar Ayaz Agricultural Sciences Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences PhD 4090 Dr. Muhammad Meraj Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 4091 Dr. Muhammad Miandad Earth Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 4092 Dr. Muhammad Moaeen ud Din Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4093 Dr. Muhammad Moaeen ud Din Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4094 Dr. Muhammad Mohibullah Khan Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 4095 Dr. Muhammad Mohsin Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS University (Lahore Campus) PhD 4096 Dr. Muhammad Mohsin Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4097 Dr. Muhammad Mohsin Raza Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 4098 Dr. Muhammad Muavia Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4099 Dr. Muhammad Muavia Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4100 Dr. Muhammad Muaz Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4101 Dr. Muhammad Mubeen Agricultural Sciences COMSATS University (Vehari Campus) PhD 4102 Dr. Muhammad Mukhtiar Chemical Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 4103 Dr. Muhammad Mumtaz Social Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 4104 Dr. Muhammad Munir Social Sciences International Islamic University PhD 4105 Dr. Muhammad Munir Social Sciences University of Narowal PhD 4106 Muhammad Murad Khan 4107 Dr. Muhammad Mursaleen Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4108 Dr. Muhammad Mursaleen Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4109 Mr. Muhammad Musab Mumtaz Social Sciences University of Lahore Masters 4110 Mr. Muhammad Musab Mumtaz Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) Masters 4111 Mr. Muhammad Mushahid Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture (Toba Tek Singh Campus) MPhil 4112 Dr. Muhammad Mushtaq Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 4113 Dr. Muhammad Mushtaq Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4114 Dr. Muhammad Mushtaq Biological Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 4115 Dr. Muhammad Mushtaq Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4116 Dr. Muhammad Muzaffar Social Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 4117 Dr. Muhammad Muzamil Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4118 Dr. Muhammad Muzammal Engineering Sciences Bahria University PhD 4119 Dr. Muhammad Nadeem Engineering Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4120 Dr. Muhammad Nadeem Physics University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4121 Dr. Muhammad Nadeem Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4122 Dr. Muhammad Nafees Social Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 4123 Dr. Muhammad Nasir Khan Engineering Sciences Government College University PhD 4124 Prof. Muhammad Nauman Aftab Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 4125 Muhammad Nawaz 4126 Dr. Muhammad Nawaz Tunio Social Sciences University of Sufism and Modern Sciences PhD 4127 Dr. Muhammad Osaid Rabie Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4128 Dr. Muhammad Osaid Rabie Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4129 Dr. Muhammad Qasim Health Sciences Khyber Medical University PhD 4130 Dr. muhammad Qasim memon Engineering Sciences University of Sufism and Modern Sciences PhD 4131 Dr. Muhammad Rashid Ali Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4132 Muhammad Rauf 4133 Dr. Muhammad Rauf Biological Sciences Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pak EPA) PhD 4134 Muhammad Rehan 4135 Muhammad riaz 4136 Dr. Muhammad Riaz Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4137 Dr. Muhammad Riaz Biological Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 4138 Muhammad Rizwan Amirzada 4139 Dr. Muhammad Sadiq Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 4140 Dr. Muhammad Saeed Chemical Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 4141 Dr. Muhammad Saeed Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 4142 Dr. Muhammad Saeed Akhtar Physics University of Education PhD 4143 Dr. Muhammad Sajid Engineering Sciences University of Chakwal PhD 4144 Mr. Muhammad Sajid Social Sciences Jinnah University for Women MPhil 4145 Prof. Muhammad Sajid Hamid Akash Health Sciences Government College University PhD 4146 Dr. Muhammad Sajid Nadeem Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4147 Mr. Muhammad Saleem Earth Sciences Oil and Gas Development Company Limited (OGDCL) Masters 4148 Mr. Muhammad Saleem Social Sciences Islamia University Masters 4149 Dr. Muhammad Saleem Jilani Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 4150 Mr. Muhammad Sami Ullah Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 4151 Mr. Muhammad Sami Ullah Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 4152 Muhammad Saqib 4153 Dr. Muhammad Saqib Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4154 Mr. Muhammad Saqib Ishaq Biological Sciences Abasyn University MPhil 4155 Dr. MUHAMMAD SARWAR KHAN Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4156 Dr. Muhammad Shabaan Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 4157 Dr. Muhammad Shabbir Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4158 Dr. Muhammad Shafique Biological Sciences National Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology PhD 4159 Mr. Muhammad Shaghil Baqa Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 4160 Mr. Muhammad Shaghil Baqa Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 4161 Dr. Muhammad Shah Health Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4162 Prof. Muhammad Shahab Siddiqui Information Technology IndusUniversity PhD 4163 Dr. Muhammad Shahid Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4164 Dr. Muhammad Shahid Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4165 Muhammad Shahid Zafar 4166 Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Environmental Sciences Government College University MPhil 4167 Dr. Muhammad Siraj Siaj Rathore Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4168 Dr. Muhammad Sohail Khan Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 4169 Prof. Muhammad Sohail Sajid Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4170 Dr. Muhammad Sulaiman Mathematics & Statistics Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4171 Dr. Muhammad Tahir Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4172 Dr. Muhammad Tahir Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4173 Dr. Muhammad Tariq Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4174 Muhammad Tariq 4175 Dr. Muhammad Tariq Zahid Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 4176 Prof. Muhammad Tauseef Sultan Health Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4177 Muhammad Umair 4178 Dr. Muhammad Umair Arshad Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 4179 Dr. Muhammad Umair Arshad Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 4180 Mr. Muhammad Umar Social Sciences University of Lahore Masters 4181 Mr. Muhammad Umar Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) Masters 4182 MUHAMMAD UMER FAROOQ 4183 Dr. Muhammad Umer Hayat Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 4184 Dr. Muhammad Umer Shafique Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4185 Muhammad Usama 4186 Muhammad Usman 4187 Dr. Muhammad Usman Ghazanfar Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4188 Dr. Muhammad Usman Rana Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4189 Dr. Muhammad Uzair Physics University of Peshawar PhD 4190 Mr. Muhammad Waris Information Technology Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering MPhil 4191 Mr. Muhammad Yameen Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology Masters 4192 Dr. Muhammad Yaseen Chemical Sciences University of Education (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 4193 Muhammad Yasin Naz 4194 Dr. Muhammad Yasin Tipu Malik Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4195 Muhammad Younis 4196 Dr. Muhammad Younis Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 4197 Dr. Muhammad Younus Jamal Siddiqi Health Sciences Jinnah Medical & Dental College PhD 4198 Mr. Muhammad Yousuf Environmental Sciences Hazara University Masters 4199 Dr. Muhammad Zafar ul Hye Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4200 Dr. Muhammad Zaffar Iqbal Agricultural Sciences Ayub Agricultural Research Institute (AARI) PhD 4201 Dr. Muhammad Zahid Chemical Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4202 Dr. Muhammad Zahid Tunio Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4203 Dr. Muhammad Zaid Biological Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 4204 Dr. Muhammad Zeeshan Information Technology Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 4205 Dr. Muhammad Zulqarnain Siddiqui Information Technology Iqra University (North Campus) PhD 4206 Mr. Muhammad Zunnurain Hussain Information Technology Bahria University (Lahore Campus) MPhil 4207 Dr. Muhammed Navid Tahir Health Sciences University of the Punjab (Quaid-e-Azam Campus/New Campus) PhD 4208 Dr. Muhmammad Ali Abdullah shah Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4209 Dr. Mukhtar Ahmmad Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4210 Dr. Mukhtar Alam Agricultural Sciences University of Swabi PhD 4211 Dr. Mumtaz Ali Information Technology City University of Science and Information Technology PhD 4212 Dr. Mumtaz Ali Saand Agricultural Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 4213 Mumtaz Ali Shah 4214 Dr. Mumtaz Qabulio Information Technology University of Sindh PhD 4215 Mr. Munawar Hameed Mangalwala Social Sciences Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology MPhil 4216 Muneeb ur Rahman 4217 Dr. Munir Ahmad Information Technology Survey of Pakistan PhD 4218 Dr. Munir Ahmad Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4219 Dr. Munir Ahmed Mangrio Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4220 Muqadas Aleem 4221 Muqaddas Khalid 4222 Mr. Murad Khan Social Sciences University of Peshawar Masters 4223 Mr. Murad Mustafa Roziani Information Technology Iqra University (North Campus) Masters 4224 Dr. Musharraf Jelani Biological Sciences The Islamia College PhD 4225 Dr. Mushtaque Ahmed Rahu Engineering Sciences Ministry of Education PhD 4226 Muskan Ahsan 4227 Dr. Muzammil Ahmad Khan Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 4228 Mrs. Naadiya Information Technology University of Sufism and Modern Sciences MPhil 4229 Dr. Nabi Bux Agricultural Sciences Abwa Medical College PhD 4230 Mr. Nabi Bux Biological Sciences Abasyn University (Islamabad Campus) PhD 4231 Nadeem Ahmed 4232 Mrs. Nadia Rehman Multidisciplinary Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC) Masters 4233 Nagina Fatima 4234 Naheed Muneer Siddiqui 4235 Dr. Naila Malkani Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 4236 Dr. Naila Shahid Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4237 Dr. Najam us Sahar Sadaf Zaidi Biological Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 4238 Dr. Najeebullah Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4239 Nargis Naz 4240 Nasar Khan 4241 Naseem Amin Dhedhi 4242 Dr. Nasim Ahmad Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4243 Dr. Nasim Akhtar Khan Engineering Sciences Hamdard University PhD 4244 Dr. Nasir Ali Tauqir Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4245 Mr. Nasir Mahmood Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF) 4246 Dr. Nasir Mukhtar Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4247 Dr. Nasir Nadeem Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 4248 Mr. Nasir Niaz Biological Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture MPhil 4249 Prof. Nasir Rajput Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4250 Dr. Nasir Rashid Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4251 Nasir Sajjad 4252 Dr. Nasr Ullah Khan Biological Sciences Gomal University PhD 4253 Dr. Nauman Khalid Agricultural Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 4254 Dr. Nauman Rahim Khan Health Sciences Kohat University of Science and Technology PhD 4255 Dr. Naumana Kiran Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4256 Dr. Naunain Mehmood Biological Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4257 Dr. Naureen Rana Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4258 Dr. NAUREEN SHEHZADI Health Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4259 Dr. Naushad Ali Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 4260 Dr. Nausheen Alam Health Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 4261 Dr. Nausheen Ishaque Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4262 Dr. Nausheen Ishaque Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4263 Dr. Nausheen Nazir Biological Sciences University of Malakand PhD 4264 Dr. Nausheen Syed Social Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 4265 Dr. Nausheen Tariq Siddiqui Health Sciences Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University Lyari PhD 4266 Dr. Naved Hamid Social Sciences Lahore School of Economics PhD 4267 Dr. Naveda Kitchlew Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 4268 Dr. Naveed Hussain Information Technology University of Central Punjab PhD 4269 Dr. Naveed Abbas Information Technology Islamia University PhD 4270 Dr. Naveed Afzal Physics Government College University PhD 4271 Dr. Naveed Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4272 Dr. Naveed Ahmad Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4273 Dr. Naveed Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Business Administration (IBA) PhD 4274 Dr. Naveed Ahmed Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4275 Dr. Naveed Akhtar Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 4276 Dr. Naveed Akhtar Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 4277 Dr. Naveed Arshad Engineering Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 4278 Dr. Naveed Ashraf Engineering Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4279 Dr. Naveed Ashraf Engineering Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4280 Dr. Naveed Farooq Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4281 Dr. Naveed Hayat Social Sciences University of Education PhD 4282 Dr. Naveed Iqbal Chemical Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 4283 Dr. NAVEED ISLAM Information Technology Islamia University PhD 4284 Dr. Naveed Khan Social Sciences Qurtaba University of Science & Information Technology PhD 4285 Dr. Naveed Mengal Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4286 Dr. Naveed Mufti Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4287 Dr. Naveed Ramzan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4288 Dr. Naveed Raza Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4289 Dr. Naveed Sabir Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 4290 Dr. Naveed Usman Social Sciences Hazara University PhD 4291 Dr. Naveed Wahid Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 4292 Dr. Naveed Yaqoob Mathematics & Statistics Riphah International University PhD 4293 Dr. Naveed Yazdani Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 4294 Dr. Naveed Ahmad Chemical Sciences University of Education PhD 4295 Dr. Naveed Ahmad Noor Earth Sciences Riphah International University PhD 4296 Dr. Naveed Ahmed Shaikh Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 4297 Dr. Naveed Akhtar Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4298 Dr. Naveed Anwar Bhatti Information Technology Air University PhD 4299 Dr. Naveed Hussain Shah Social Sciences University of Swabi PhD 4300 Dr. Naveed Iqbal Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4301 Dr. Naveed Iqbal Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4302 Dr. Naveed Iqbal Chaudhry Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4303 Dr. Naveed Sheikh Engineering Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 4304 Mr. Naveed Ul Hassan Biological Sciences University of Agriculture (Depalpur Campus) MPhil 4305 Dr. Naveed Ur Rehman Khattak Social Sciences Air University PhD 4306 Dr. Naveeda Akhtar Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 4307 Dr. Naveen Kosar Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 4308 Dr. Nawar Khan Engineering Sciences Riphah International University PhD 4309 Dr. Nawishta Jabeen Physics Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 4310 Dr. Nayab Batool Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4311 Dr. Nayab Tahir Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4312 Dr. Nayab Iftikhar Health Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4313 Nayab Khan 4314 Dr. Nayyar Mehmood Mathematics & Statistics International Islamic University PhD 4315 Dr. Nayyar Hussain Mirjat Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4316 Dr. Nayyer Islam Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4317 Dr. Nayyer Islam Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4318 Dr. Nayyer Masood Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4319 Mr. Nayyer Saleem Earth Sciences Survey of Pakistan 4320 Dr. Nayyra Zeb Social Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 4321 Dr. Nazar Hussain Malik Engineering Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 4322 Dr. Nazeer Ahmed Biological Sciences Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4323 Dr. Nazeer Khan Social Sciences Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University PhD 4324 Mr. Nazeer Ahmed Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences MPhil 4325 Mr. Nazeer Ali Panhwar Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University Masters 4326 Dr. Nazia Akbar Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 4327 Dr. Nazia Anwar Information Technology University of Education PhD 4328 Dr. Nazia Bibi Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4329 Dr. Nazia Jamil Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4330 Dr. Nazia Nahid Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 4331 Dr. Nazia Nawaz Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 4332 Dr. Nazia Ahmed Biological Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 4333 Dr. Nazia Arshad Earth Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4334 Dr. Nazia Malik Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4335 Dr. Nazia Nazeer Social Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 4336 Dr. Nazia Talat Mathematics & Statistics Bahria University PhD 4337 Dr. Nazif Ullah Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4338 Dr. NAZIM HUSSAIN Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4339 Dr. Nazim Rahim Social Sciences Qurtaba University of Science & Information Technology PhD 4340 Dr. Nazim Hassain Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4341 Dr. Nazima Ellahi Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 4342 Dr. Nazir Ahmad Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4343 Dr. NAZIR AHMAD Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 4344 Dr. NAZIR AHMED Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 4345 Dr. Nazir Ahmad Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4346 Dr. Nazir Ahmad Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4347 Dr. Nazir Haider Shah Social Sciences University of Kotli Azad Jammu and Kashmir PhD 4348 Dr. Nazish Roy Biological Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 4349 Dr. NAZISH BOSTAN Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4350 Dr. NAZISH MAZHAR ALI Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 4351 Dr. Nazneen Bangash Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4352 Dr. Neelam Rashid Biological Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 4353 Dr. Neelam Gohar Information Technology Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 4354 Dr. Neelma Munir Biological Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 4355 Dr. Neelum Almas Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 4356 Dr. Nehar Ullah Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4357 Dr. NELOFAR KIRAN RAUF Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 4358 Dr. Niamat Ullah Information Technology University of Buner PhD 4359 Dr. Niamat Ullah Social Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 4360 Dr. Niat Nigar Mathematics & Statistics Minhaj University PhD 4361 Dr. Niaz Ahmad Biological Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 4362 Dr. Niaz Ali Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University PhD 4363 Dr. Niaz Muhammad Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4364 Dr. Niaz Ahmed Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4365 Dr. Niaz Ahmed Bhutto Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 4366 Dr. Niaz Bahadur Khan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4367 Dr. Niaz Hussain Ghumro Mathematics & Statistics Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 4368 Ms. Nida Jawaid Health Sciences University of Karachi MPhil 4369 Nida Qamar 4370 Nidaa Harun 4371 Dr. Nigar Ali Mathematics & Statistics University of Malakand PhD 4372 Dr. Nighat Sultana Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 4373 Dr. Nighat Yasmin Biological Sciences King Edward Medical University PhD 4374 Dr. Nisar Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Swat PhD 4375 Dr. Nisar Ahmad Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4376 Dr. Nisar Ahmed Engineering Sciences Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences & Technology PhD 4377 Dr. Nisar Ahmed Shar Biological Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4378 Dr. Nisar Mohammad Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4379 Dr. Nisar Muhammad Environmental Sciences Gomal University PhD 4380 Dr. Nisbat ALi Malik Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4381 Dr. Nizam Uddin Engineering Sciences HITEC University PhD 4382 Dr. Nizam Uddin Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4383 Dr. Nizamud Din Information Technology University of Chitral PhD 4384 Dr. Nizar Ahmad Social Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 4385 Dr. Noaman Ul Haq Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4386 Dr. NOMAN AHMED Social Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4387 Dr. NOMAN ALI BUTTAR Agricultural Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 4388 Dr. Noman Arshed Social Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 4389 Dr. Noman Islam Information Technology Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology PhD 4390 Dr. Noman Khan Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4391 Dr. NOMAN SAEED Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4392 Dr. Noman Sahito Social Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4393 Dr. Noman Soomro Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 4394 Dr. Noor Badshah Social Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4395 Dr. Noor Hayat Social Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 4396 Dr. Noor Rahman Engineering Sciences International Islamic University PhD 4397 Dr. Noor Ahmed Brohi Social Sciences Begum Nustrat Bhutto Women University PhD 4398 Dr. Noor Ahmed Memon Engineering Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 4399 Dr. Noor Ahmed Shaikh Information Technology Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 4400 Dr. Noor Elahi Social Sciences COMSATS University (Abbottabad Campus) PhD 4401 Dr. Noor Hassan Biological Sciences Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) PhD 4402 Dr. Noor Hussain Chandio Social Sciences Shah Abdul Latif University PhD 4403 Dr. Noor Jehan Social Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4404 Dr. Noor Kamil Health Sciences Salim Habib University (Former Barret Hodgson University) PhD 4405 Dr. Noor Khan Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4406 Dr. Noor Muhammad Khan Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4407 Dr. Noor Rehman Mathematics & Statistics Bacha Khan University PhD 4408 Dr. Noor Sabah Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4409 Dr. Noor Shad Bibi Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4410 Dr. Noor ul Amin Information Technology Hazara University PhD 4411 Dr. NOOR UL AMIN MOHSIN Health Sciences Government College University PhD 4412 Dr. Noor ul Basar Aman Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 4413 Dr. Noor Ullah Khan Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4414 Dr. Noor Ullah Khan Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4415 Dr. Noor un nisa Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4416 Dr. Noorul Amin Chemical Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4417 Dr. Noorulain Soomro Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 4418 Dr. NOOSHEEN ZAHID Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 4419 Dr. NOREEN LATIEF Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4420 Dr. Noreen Sarwar Biological Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4421 Dr. Noreen Sajjad Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4422 Dr. Noreen Sajjad Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4423 Dr. Noreena Kausar Social Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 4424 Dr. Noshaba Batool Social Sciences Air University PhD 4425 Dr. Noshaba Younus Social Sciences Riphah International University PhD 4426 Dr. Noshabah Tabassum Environmental Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 4427 Dr. Noshad Khan Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 4428 Dr. Nosharwan Arbab Abbasi Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4429 Dr. Nosheen Akhtar Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 4430 Dr. Nosheen Fatima Rana Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4431 Dr. Nosheen Masood Biological Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 4432 Dr. Nosheen Mushahid Physics University of Lahore PhD 4433 Dr. Nosheen Mushahid Physics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4434 Dr. Nosheen Sarwat Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University (Layyah Campus) PhD 4435 Dr. Nosherwan Shoaib Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4436 Dr. Noshi Iram Zaman Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 4437 Dr. Noshin Ilyas Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4438 Dr. NOSHIN AFSHAN Chemical Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 4439 Dr. Noshina Tariq Information Technology Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 4440 Dr. Nouman Ali Engineering Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 4441 Dr. Nouman Amjed Physics University of Lahore PhD 4442 Dr. Nouman Amjed Physics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4443 Dr. Nouman Azam Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 4444 Dr. Nousheen Mushtaq Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4445 Dr. Nousheen Tariq Bhutta Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4446 Dr. Nousheen Tariq Bhutta Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4447 Dr. Nousheen Yousaf Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 4448 Dr. Nudra Malik Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 4449 Dr. Numair Ahmed Sulehri Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 4450 Dr. Numan Javed Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4451 Dr. Nuruddin Mohammed Health Sciences Aga Khan University PhD 4452 Dr. Nusrat Ehsan Environmental Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4453 Dr. Nusrat Ehsan Environmental Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4454 Dr. Nusrat Hussain Chemical Sciences University of Baltistan PhD 4455 Dr. Nusrat Jabeen Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4456 Dr. Nusrat Shafiq Chemical Sciences Government College for Women University PhD 4457 Dr. Nusrat Shaheen Chemical Sciences Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 4458 Dr. Nuzhat Arshad Chemical Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4459 Dr. nuzhat fatima zaidi Biological Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 4460 Dr. Nuzhat Sial Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 4461 Dr. Nyla Amjed Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4462 Dr. Nyla Amjed Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4463 Dr. Nyla Amjed Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4464 Dr. Nyla Amjed Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4465 Dr. Nyla Jabeen Biological Sciences International Islamic University PhD 4466 Dr. Obaidullah Nadeem Social Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4467 Dr. Omar Riaz Earth Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4468 Dr. Omar Arif Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4469 Dr. Omar Aziz Environmental Sciences University of Agriculture (Depalpur Campus) PhD 4470 Dr. Omar Hayat Engineering Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4471 Dr. Omar Javaid Social Sciences Institute of Business Management PhD 4472 Dr. Omar Usman Khan Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Peshawar Campus) PhD 4473 Dr. Omer Saleem Bhatti Engineering Sciences National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 4474 Dr. Onaiza Maqbool Information Technology Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 4475 Dr. Orangzab Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4476 Dr. Osman Hasan Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4477 Dr. Owais Mufti Social Sciences Institute of Management Sciences PhD 4478 Dr. Owais Shafique Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 4479 Dr. OWAIS ANWAR GOLRA Social Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4480 Dr. Owais Raza Health Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 4481 Dr. Oyoon Abdul Razzaq Social Sciences Bahria University PhD 4482 Dr. Pakeeza Akram Information Technology National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4483 Dr. PAKEEZA ARZOO SHAIQ Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4484 Dr. Pakeeza Ashraf Mathematics & Statistics Government Sadiq College Women University PhD 4485 Dr. Palvasha Waheed Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 4486 Dr. Pardeep Kumar Gianchandani Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4487 Mr. Parkash Meghwar Agricultural Sciences Food Department MPhil 4488 Dr. Parveen Akhtar Kallu Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4489 Dr. Parveen Akhter Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4490 Dr. Parveen Akhter Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4491 Dr. Pasand Ali Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 4492 Dr. Pervaiz Ahmad Physics University of Sindh PhD 4493 Dr. Pervaiz Ahmad Physics University of Sindh PhD 4494 Dr. Pervaiz Ahmad Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University PhD 4495 Dr. Pervaiz Akhtar Shah Health Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4496 Dr. Pervaiz Ali Mahesar Social Sciences University of Sindh PhD 4497 Dr. PERVAIZ SIKANDAR Agricultural Sciences Government of Punjab PhD 4498 Dr. PERVEZ HAMEED SHAIKH Engineering Sciences Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4499 Dr. Peter John Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4500 Dr. PETER JOHN Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4501 Dr. Phool Shahzadi Chemical Sciences Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR) PhD 4502 Dr. Pir Asmat ALi Biological Sciences Women University PhD 4503 Prof Dr Farhat Batool 4504 Prof Dr Muhammad Akram Shaikh 4505 Prof. Prof Muhammad Subhan Qureshi Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4506 Prof. Prof. Dr. Amber Nawab Health Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 4507 Prof. Prof. Dr. Anwar Latif Physics University of Sialkot PhD 4508 Prof. Prof. Dr. Kausar Malik Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4509 Prof. Prof. Dr. Khurram Shabbir Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 4510 Dr. Prof. Dr. Mahmooda Kazmi Biological Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 4511 Prof. Prof. Dr. Muhammad Anjum Zia Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4512 Prof. Prof. Dr. Muhammad Iqbal Afridi Health Sciences Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center PhD 4513 Dr. Prof. Dr. Muhammad Shaheen Information Technology Foundation University PhD 4514 Prof. Dr. Munawar Hussain 4515 Prof. Prof. Dr. Saif Ullah Mathematics & Statistics Government College University PhD 4516 Prof. PROF. DR. SAJID RASHID AHMAD Environmental Sciences University of the Punjab (Quaid-e-Azam Campus/New Campus) PhD 4517 Dr. Prof. Dr. Shahida Aman Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 4518 Prof. Dr. Shahzad Maqsood Khan 4519 Prof. Dr. Tehreema Iftikhar 4520 Prof.Dr. Yasira Naeem Pasha 4521 Prof.Dr.Rashida Hussain 4522 Dr. Punhal Khan Lashari Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 4523 Dr. Punhal Khan Lashari Agricultural Sciences University of Sindh PhD 4524 Dr. Qadeer ul Hasan Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4525 Dr. QAISAR ALI Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4526 Dr. Qaisar Ali Malik Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 4527 Dr. Qaisar Ayyub Sheikh Engineering Sciences University of Wah PhD 4528 Dr. Qaisar Khan Mathematics & Statistics University of Haripur PhD 4529 Dr. Qaisar Mahmood Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4530 Dr. Qaisar Raza Health Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4531 Dr. Qaisar Shafi Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 4532 Dr. QAISARA PERVEEN Social Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4533 Dr. Qaiser Abbas Information Technology University of Sargodha PhD 4534 Dr. Qaiser Hussain Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4535 Dr. Qaiser Iqbal Health Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 4536 Dr. Qaiser Mehmood Social Sciences Iqra National University PhD 4537 Dr. Qaiser Shakeel Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 4538 Dr. Qaiser uz Zaman Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4539 Dr. Qaiser uz Zaman Khan Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4540 Dr. Qamar Abbas Social Sciences Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 4541 Dr. Qamar Abbas Biological Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 4542 Dr. Qamar Ali Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4543 Dr. Qamar Fatima Social Sciences Lahore College for Women University PhD 4544 Dr. Qamar Saeed Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4545 Dr. Qamar Sarfaraz Agricultural Sciences Lasbela University of Agriculture, Water and Marine Sciences PhD 4546 Dr. Qamar uz Zaman Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4547 Dr. Qamar uz Zaman Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4548 Dr. Qamar Uz Zaman Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4549 Dr. Qamar Wali Social Sciences National University of Technology (NUTECH) PhD 4550 Dr. Qamar Wali Social Sciences National University of Technology (NUTECH) PhD 4551 Dr. QAMAS GUL Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4552 Dr. QASIM ALI Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 4553 Dr. Qasim Ali Arain Information Technology Mehran University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4554 Dr. Qasim Ali Ranjha Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4555 Dr. Qasim Khan Health Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4556 Dr. QASIM MAHMOOD Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4557 Dr. Qasim Saleem Social Sciences GIFT University PhD 4558 Dr. Qasim Umer Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4559 Dr. QASIR ABBAS Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4560 Dr. Qayyum Zafar Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 4561 Dr. Qazi Adnan Ahmad Social Sciences Bacha Khan University PhD 4562 Dr. Qazi Adnan Jamil Health Sciences Islamia University PhD 4563 Dr. Qazi Adnan Jamil Health Sciences Islamia University PhD 4564 Dr. Qazi Adnan Jamil Health Sciences Islamia University PhD 4565 Dr. Qazi Ejaz Ali Information Technology University of Peshawar PhD 4566 Dr. Qazi M Zaigham Zia Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4567 Dr. Qazi Mahmood Ul Hassan Mathematics & Statistics University of Wah PhD 4568 Dr. Qazi Masood Ahmed Social Sciences Institute of Business Administration (IBA) PhD 4569 Mr. Qazi Shahab Azam Information Technology Iqra University (North Campus) Masters 4570 Dr. Qazi Zahoor Ahmad Mathematics & Statistics Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 4571 Dr. Qeemat Gul Physics University of Okara PhD 4572 Dr. Quaid Zaman Physics University of Buner PhD 4573 Dr. Quanita Kiran Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4574 Dr. Qudrat Khan Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4575 Dr. Qudrat Ullah Khan Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 4576 Dr. Qudsia Hassan Chemical Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 4577 Dr. Qudsia Kalsoom Social Sciences Beaconhouse National University PhD 4578 Dr. Qudsia Kanwal Chemical Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4579 Dr. Qudsia Kanwal Chemical Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4580 Mrs. Qudsia Zafar Environmental Sciences Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC) MPhil 4581 Dr. Qumber Abbas Chemical Sciences Khawaja Freed University of Engineering & Information Technology PhD 4582 Dr. QURAT UL AIN Physics University of Management & Technology PhD 4583 Dr. Qurat ul Ain Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Education (Bank Road Campus Lahore) PhD 4584 Ms. QURAT UL AIN AHMAD Environmental Sciences Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC) PhD 4585 Dr. Qurat ul wAin Azim Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4586 Dr. Quratulain Saeed Health Sciences Foundation University Masters 4587 Dr. Qurrat ul Ain Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4588 Dr. Qurratul Ann Afza Gardner Biological Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4589 Dr. Rab Nawaz Social Sciences HITEC University PhD 4590 Dr. Rab Nawaz Information Technology COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4591 Dr. Rabaab Zahra Biological Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 4592 Dr. Rabail Urooj Environmental Sciences Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 4593 Dr. Rabail Zehra Raza Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 4594 Dr. Rabea Ejaz Biological Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 4595 Rabea Saleem 4596 Dr. Rabeeh Ayaz Abbasi Information Technology Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 4597 Dr. Rabeeya Raoof Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4598 Dr. Rabeeya Raoof Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4599 Ms. rabia luqman Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology 4600 Dr. Rabia Aamir Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4601 Dr. Rabia Abdul Karim Social Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 4602 Dr. Rabia Afza Kashif Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 4603 Dr. Rabia Akhtar Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4604 Dr. Rabia Akhtar Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4605 Dr. Rabia Amir Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4606 Dr. Rabia Faridi Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 4607 Dr. Rabia Farooqi Social Sciences University of Central Punjab PhD 4608 Dr. Rabia Ghaffar Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 4609 Dr. Rabia Ghaffar Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 4610 Dr. Rabia Habib Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4611 Dr. Rabia Hameed Mathematics & Statistics Government Sadiq College Women University PhD 4612 Dr. Rabia Ishrat Social Sciences Sarhad University of Science & Information Technology PhD 4613 Dr. Rabia Ismail Yousuf Health Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4614 Ms. Rabia Javed Information Technology Lahore College for Women University 4615 Dr. Rabia Liaquat Biological Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4616 Dr. RABIA MASOOD UR REHMAN Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 4617 Dr. Rabia Mushtaq Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 4618 Dr. Rabia Naeem Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4619 Dr. Rabia Naz Agricultural Sciences Kinnaird College for Women PhD 4620 Dr. Rabia Naz Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4621 Dr. Rabia Nazar Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4622 Dr. Rabia Nazir Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4623 Dr. Rabia Nazir Biological Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4624 Dr. Rabia parveen Mangi Health Sciences University of Sindh PhD 4625 Dr. Rabia Qammar Social Sciences ILMA University PhD 4626 Dr. Rabia Rehman Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4627 Dr. Rabia Saleem Mathematics & Statistics COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4628 Dr. Rabia Shabbir Environmental Sciences Fatima Jinnah Women University PhD 4629 Dr. Rabia Shabir Ahmad Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 4630 Dr. RABIA SHAKOOR Engineering Sciences Islamia University PhD 4631 Dr. Rabia Yaqoob Biological Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4632 Dr. Rabia Yasmin Khosa Physics University of Education (Bank Road Campus Lahore) PhD 4633 Dr. Rabiah Badar Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4634 Dr. Rabil Tabassum Mathematics & Statistics Air University PhD 4635 Dr. Rabiya Noor Health Sciences Riphah International University PhD 4636 Dr. Rabya Aslam Chemical Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4637 Dr. Raees Ahmed Agricultural Sciences University of the Poonch PhD 4638 Dr. Raees Fida Swati Engineering Sciences Institute of Space Technology PhD 4639 Dr. Raees Khan Biological Sciences National University of Medical Sciences PhD 4640 Dr. Rafaqat Hussain Chemical Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4641 Dr. Rafaqat Masroor Biological Sciences Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF) PhD 4642 Dr. RAFEEQ ALAM KHAN Health Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 4643 Dr. Rafi Ud Din Physics University of Swat PhD 4644 Dr. Rafi Ullah Agricultural Sciences University of Swabi PhD 4645 Dr. Rafi Ullah Biological Sciences Riphah International University PhD 4646 Dr. Rafi ullah Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 4647 Dr. Rafi Ullah Khan Information Technology University of Agriculture PhD 4648 Dr. Rafia Mumtaz Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4649 Dr. Rafia Rafique Social Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4650 Dr. Rafia Rehman Chemical Sciences University of Okara PhD 4651 Dr. Rafia Younas Engineering Sciences Gomal University PhD 4652 Dr. Rafiq Ahmad Biological Sciences Mir Chakar Khan Rind University PhD 4653 Dr. RAFIQ AHMED Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4654 Dr. Rafiullah Biological Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 4655 Dr. Raham Sher Khan Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University PhD 4656 Dr. Rahat Abdul Rehman Biological Sciences University of Health Sciences PhD 4657 Dr. Raheel Ahmed Memon Information Technology Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 4658 Dr. Raheel Anwar Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4659 Dr. RAHEEL SAFDAR Social Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences (Patoki Campus) PhD 4660 Dr. Raheel Suleman Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4661 Dr. Raheel Zafar Engineering Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4662 Dr. Raheela Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4663 Dr. Raheela Akhtar Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4664 Dr. Raheela Asif Information Technology NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4665 Dr. Raheela Bibi Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University PhD 4666 Dr. Raheela Jabeen Biological Sciences The Women University PhD 4667 Dr. Raheela Manzoor Mathematics & Statistics Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University PhD 4668 Dr. Raheela Rahmat Zohra Multidisciplinary University of Karachi PhD 4669 Dr. Raheem Shahzad Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 4670 Dr. Rahila Naz Mathematics & Statistics Institute of Space Technology PhD 4671 Dr. Rahila Nizami Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4672 Dr. Rahila Nizami Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4673 Dr. Rahim khan Social Sciences Qurtaba University of Science & Information Technology PhD 4674 Dr. Rahman Shah Zaib Saleem Chemical Sciences Lahore University of Management Sciences PhD 4675 Dr. Rahman Ullah Mathematics & Statistics Women University PhD 4676 Dr. Rahmat Ali Khan Biological Sciences University of Science & Technology PhD 4677 Dr. Rahmatullah Qureshi Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4678 Dr. Rahmatullah Shah Social Sciences University of Science & Technology PhD 4679 Dr. Rai Muhammad Sarfraz Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4680 Dr. Rai Muhammad Sarfraz Chemical Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4681 Dr. RAI SAJJAD SAIF Mathematics & Statistics National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4682 Dr. RAIMA NAZAR Social Sciences Women University PhD 4683 Dr. Raisa Bano Health Sciences Women University PhD 4684 Dr. Raisa Bano Health Sciences Women University PhD 4685 Dr. Raja Ali Riaz Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4686 Mr. Raja Fahad Khalid Earth Sciences Survey of Pakistan 4687 Dr. Raja Masood Larik Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4688 Dr. Raja Mohammad Waqas Social Sciences Iqra University (Islamabad Campus) PhD 4689 Dr. Raja Noshad Jamil Mathematics & Statistics University of Management & Technology PhD 4690 Dr. Raja Qaiser Khan Social Sciences Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Sciences & Technology PhD 4691 Dr. RAJA SHAHID ASHRAF Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4692 Dr. Raja Tahir Mahmood Biological Sciences Mirpur University of Science & Technology PhD 4693 Dr. RAJA UMER SAJJAD Environmental Sciences Sindh Madresatul Islam University PhD 4694 Dr. Raja Waqar Ahmed Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir PhD 4695 Dr. Rajab Ali Malookani Mathematics & Statistics Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering PhD 4696 Dr. Rajwali Khan Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 4697 Dr. Rajwali Khan Physics University of Lakki Marwat PhD 4698 Dr. Rakhshanda Kousar Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4699 Dr. Rakhshanda Mushtaq Biological Sciences University of Okara PhD 4700 Dr. Rakhshanda Naveed Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4701 Ms. Rameen Shahzad Health Sciences The University of Faisalabad MPhil 4702 Dr. Rameez Hayat Engineering Sciences National University of Sciences & Technology PhD 4703 Dr. Rameez Ishaq Biological Sciences Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences PhD 4704 Dr. Ramesh Kumar Health Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 4705 Prof. Ramesh Kumar Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4706 Dr. Ramiz ur Rehman Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4707 Dr. Ramiz ur Rehman Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4708 Dr. Rana Aamir Raza Ashfaq Information Technology Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4709 Dr. Rana Aman Ullah Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4710 Dr. Rana Asif Rehman Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences PhD 4711 Dr. Rana Hadi Biological Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 4712 Dr. Rana Imroze Palwishah Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 4713 Dr. Rana Iqtidar Shakoor Engineering Sciences Air University PhD 4714 Dr. Rana Khalid IQBAL Biological Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4715 Dr. Rana Liaqat Ali Engineering Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4716 Dr. Rana Mazhar Abbas Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4717 Dr. Rana Muhammad Aadil Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4718 Dr. Rana Muhammad Adeel Farooq Social Sciences University of Sahiwal PhD 4719 Dr. Rana Muhammad Atif Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4720 Dr. Rana Muhammad Bilal Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 4721 Dr. Rana Muhammad Kamran Shabbir Biological Sciences University of Education PhD 4722 Dr. Rana Muhammad Shahid Yaqub Social Sciences Islamia University PhD 4723 Dr. Rana Nadir Idrees Social Sciences COMSATS Institute of Information Technology PhD 4724 Dr. Rana Rabnawaz Ahmed Engineering Sciences NED University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4725 Dr. Rana Rashad Mahmood Khan Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4726 Dr. Rana Saba Sultan Social Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4727 Dr. RANA SALMAN ANJUM Biological Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 4728 Dr. Rana tahir Naveed Social Sciences University of Education PhD 4729 Mr. Rana Tanveer Hussain Social Sciences Minhaj University PhD 4730 Dr. Rana Waseem Akhtar Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 4731 Dr. Rana Zain ul Abidin Social Sciences ILMA University PhD 4732 Dr. Rani Gul Social Sciences University of Malakand PhD 4733 Dr. Rao Akmal Ali Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4734 Dr. Rao Akmal Ali Social Sciences National University of Modern Languages PhD 4735 Dr. Rao Imran Habib Social Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4736 Dr. Rao Kashif Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 4737 Dr. Rao Zahid Abbas Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4738 Dr. Rashad Rasool Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4739 Dr. Rashid Amin Information Technology University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4740 Rashid Farooq 4741 Dr. Rashid Iqbal Health Sciences National Skills University PhD 4742 Dr. Rashid Saeed Agricultural Sciences University of Gujrat PhD 4743 Razia Virk 4744 Dr. Reaz Uddin Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4745 Rehana Masood 4746 Dr. Rehana Naz Syed Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4747 Prof. Riaz Ahmad Physics Government College University PhD 4748 Riaz Mustafa 4749 Rida Akbar 4750 Rida Hamid 4751 Ms. Rida haya Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology Masters 4752 Riffat Shaheen 4753 Dr. RIFFAT SULTANA Biological Sciences University of Sindh PhD 4754 Ms. Rifhat Hashim Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 4755 Dr. RIZWAN ALI Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4756 Dr. RIZWAN ALI Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4757 Dr. Rizwan Ali Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4758 Dr. Rizwan Ali Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4759 Rizwan Bin Faiz 4760 Rizwan Rasheed 4761 Rooh Ullah 4762 Dr. Rozina Gul Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4763 Rubina Zulfqar 4764 Rukhsar Zaka 4765 Ruqia Ruqia Mirwani 4766 Dr. Saadia Mustafa Health Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 4767 saba saeed 4768 Saba Zulfiqar 4769 Sabeeh Ahmed 4770 Sabeen Azam 4771 Sabira Reesham 4772 Dr. Sadaf farooqi Health Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4773 Dr. Sadaf javaria Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 4774 Dr. Sadaf Mahmood Social Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4775 Dr. Sadam Hussain Soomro Engineering Sciences IndusUniversity PhD 4776 Dr. Sadaruddin Chachar Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4777 Dr. SADDAM HUSSAIN Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4778 Sadia Gul 4779 Dr. Saeed Akhtar Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4780 Dr. Saeed Akhter Abro Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4781 Saeed Akram khan 4782 Dr. Saeed Rauf Agricultural Sciences University of Sargodha PhD 4783 Safa Iftikhar 4784 Dr. SAFDAR ALI Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4785 Dr. Safdar Hassan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4786 Safia Khan 4787 Dr. Sahib Alam Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture Peshawar PhD 4788 Dr. Said Hassan Biological Sciences Abasyn University PhD 4789 Dr. Said Jasim Shah Biological Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 4790 Said Karim Shah 4791 Saif Ullah 4792 Mr. Saif Ullah Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 4793 Dr. Saif Ullah Engineering Sciences University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4794 Dr. Saima Kalsoom Babar Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4795 Dr. Saima Pervaiz Health Sciences University of Health Sciences MPhil 4796 Saira Azam 4797 Saira Khanm 4798 Dr. Sajad Ali Physics University of Peshawar PhD 4799 Dr. Sajid Hussain Social Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 4800 Sajid Hussain Shah 4801 Dr. Sajid Iqbal Engineering Sciences The Superior College PhD 4802 Dr. Sajid Mahmood Nadeem Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture (Burewala Campus) PhD 4803 Dr. Sajid ur Rahman Agricultural Sciences Ayub Agricultural Research Institute (AARI) PhD 4804 Sajida Naseem 4805 Dr. Sajjad Ali Chemical Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 4806 Dr. Sajjad Haidar Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 4807 Dr. Sajjad Haider Information Technology National University of Modern Languages PhD 4808 Dr. Sajjad Khan Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC) PhD 4809 Sakandar Rauf 4810 Saleem Nawaz 4811 Dr. SALIK NAWAZ KHAN Agricultural Sciences University of the Punjab PhD 4812 Dr. Salima Ahsan Tejani Social Sciences Iqra University (North Campus) PhD 4813 Dr. Salman Ahmed Health Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4814 Salman Ahmed 4815 Mr. Salman Ahmed Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology Masters 4816 Dr. Salman Azam Joiya Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4817 Dr. Salman Azam Joiya Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4818 Salman Saleem 4819 Dr. Sameena Mumtaz Biological Sciences Karakurum International University PhD 4820 Sami Ul Haq 4821 Dr. Sami Ullah Jan Biological Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4822 Dr. Sami Ullah Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Haripur PhD 4823 Dr. Samia Afzal Biological Sciences National Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology PhD 4824 Dr. Samina gul Social Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4825 Dr. Samina gul Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4826 Dr. Samina Iqbal Biological Sciences Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR) PhD 4827 Prof. Samina Naeem Khalid Health Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 4828 Dr. SAMINA SIDDIQUI Agricultural Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 4829 Ms. SAMRA NASEER Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 4830 Dr. Samra Subhani Social Sciences The University of Faisalabad PhD 4831 Prof. Samreen Hussain Engineering Sciences Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4832 Dr. Samreen Saleem Biological Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 4833 Sana jadoon 4834 Dr. Sana Javaid Chemical Sciences University of Wah PhD 4835 Dr. Sana Nadeem Health Sciences Foundation University Medical College Masters 4836 Dr. Sana Shamim Biological Sciences DOW University of Health Sciences PhD 4837 Ms. Sania Tabassum Biological Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 4838 Dr. Saqib Ali Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 4839 Prof. Saqib Ali Information Technology University of Agriculture PhD 4840 Saqib Jabbar 4841 Saqib khan 4842 Sara Zafar 4843 Dr. Sarah Salah Ud Din Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4844 Prof. Sardar Khan Environmental Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 4845 Dr. Sardar Khan Environmental Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 4846 Dr. Sarfraz Ali Mathematics & Statistics University of Education (Faisalabad Campus) PhD 4847 Dr. Sarfraz Ali Shad Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4848 Dr. Sarwat Iqbal Information Technology Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD 4849 Dr. Sarzamin Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4850 Prof. Saud Altaf Information Technology National Skills University PhD 4851 Dr. Sayyed Ghyour Abbas Biological Sciences University of Sialkot PhD 4852 Dr. Sayyed Sadaqat Hussain Shah Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4853 Sehrish Naseer 4854 Shafiq Ur Rehman 4855 Dr. shafqat saeed Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 4856 Dr. Shaghef Ejaz Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4857 SHAGUFTA IQBAL 4858 Prof. Shah Jahan Biological Sciences University of Health Sciences PhD 4859 Mr. Shah Saud Agricultural Sciences The University of Agriculture MPhil 4860 Dr. Shahab Alam Malik Social Sciences Minhaj University PhD 4861 Mr. Shahan Anwar Biological Sciences Hazara University MPhil 4862 Dr. Shahbaz Ahmad Zakki Health Sciences University of Haripur PhD 4863 Shahbaz Mehmood 4864 Dr. Shahbaz Talib SAhi Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4865 Dr. Shaheer Ellahi Khan Social Sciences Health Services Academy (HSA) PhD 4866 Dr. Shahid Adeel Chemical Sciences Government College University PhD 4867 Dr. SHAHID AHMED JUNEJO Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4868 Dr. SHAHID BASHIR Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4869 Dr. SHAHID BASHIR Agricultural Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4870 Dr. Shahina Fayyaz Agricultural Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4871 Shahla Adnan 4872 Dr. Shahzad Bashir Biological Sciences Minhaj University PhD 4873 Dr. Shahzad Hussain Social Sciences Government College University PhD 4874 Dr. Shahzada Sohail Ijaz Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4875 Dr. Shahzor Gul Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4876 Shaikh Mohiuddin 4877 Dr. SHAKEEL AHMAD Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4878 Shakeel Ahmed 4879 Dr. Shakeel Ahmed Soomro Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4880 Dr. Shakeel Babar Biological Sciences University of Balochistan PhD 4881 Dr. SHAKEEL HUSSAIN CHATTHA Engineering Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4882 Dr. Shakeel Mahmood Physics Air University PhD 4883 Dr. Shamsa Kanwal Mathematics & Statistics Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 4884 Mr. Shanemuhamad Ch. Abdulgafor Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 4885 Mr. Shanemuhamad Ch. Abdulgafor Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 4886 Dr. Shaukat Wasi Information Technology Mohammad Ali Jinnah University PhD 4887 Mr. Shayan Ahmed Information Technology Iqra University (North Campus) MPhil 4888 Dr. Shazia Nisar Chemical Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4889 Dr. Shehzad Khalid Information Technology Bahria University PhD 4890 Dr. Sheikh Muhammad Zeeshan Iqbal Physics University of Karachi PhD 4891 Dr. Sher Ali Shaikh Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4892 Sher Khan 4893 Dr. Sher Khan Panhwar Biological Sciences University of Karachi PhD 4894 Mr. Sher Muhammad Social Sciences University of Sindh Bachelors 4895 Dr. Sher Zaman Khan Social Sciences Gomal University PhD 4896 Shifa Ullah Khan 4897 Dr. Shoaib Ahmed Pirzado Biological Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4898 Mr. Shoaib Muhammad Engineering Sciences University of Wah MPhil 4899 Shoaiba Naz 4900 Dr. Shuaib Ahmad Health Sciences Abbottabad University of Science and Technology PhD 4901 Shumaila Naz 4902 Ms. Shumaila Noreen Multidisciplinary University of Lahore PhD 4903 Ms. Shumaila Noreen Multidisciplinary University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4904 Sidra Ayub 4905 Sidra Liaqat 4906 Ms. Sidra Rehman Information Technology Iqra University Masters 4907 Dr. Sidra Wajid Agricultural Sciences University of Jhang MPhil 4908 Siraj Muhammad 4909 Ms. Snober Naseer Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology MPhil 4910 Dr. Sobia Chohan Agricultural Sciences Bahauddin Zakariya University PhD 4911 Sobia Masood 4912 Sobia Saher 4913 Dr. Sofia Khalique Alvi Chemical Sciences Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR) PhD 4914 Dr. Sohail Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4915 Dr. Sohail Ahmad Jan Biological Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4916 Dr. Sohail Ahmed Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4917 Dr. Sohail Azmat Physics University of Education PhD 4918 Dr. Sohail Mehmood Social Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 4919 Soma Vankwani 4920 Mrs. Sonila Zahir Physics Higher Education Commission (HEC) MPhil 4921 Dr. Soniya Munir Environmental Sciences University of Lahore PhD 4922 Dr. Soniya Munir Environmental Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 4923 Ms. SUFIA MUSTAFA Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 4924 Ms. SUFIA MUSTAFA Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 4925 Dr. Suhni Abbasi Information Technology Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4926 Sultan Ali 4927 Prof. Sultan Habibullah Khan Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4928 Dr. Sultana Bashir Biological Sciences Minhaj University PhD 4929 Dr. sumbal nazir Biological Sciences Minhaj University PhD 4930 Dr. Sumbel Ijaz Engineering Sciences Government College University PhD 4931 Dr. Sumera Yasmin Biological Sciences Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences PhD 4932 Sundas Shoaib 4933 Dr. Syed Aamir Ali Shah Social Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration PhD 4934 Syed Abbas Raza 4935 Dr. Syed Aftab Hussain Shah Biological Sciences Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF) PhD 4936 Prof. Syed Ahmed Nawaz Biological Sciences University of Balochistan MPhil 4937 Syed Ali Asgher 4938 Mr. Syed Ali Haider Naqvi Information Technology Lahore Garrison University MPhil 4939 Mr. Syed Amjad Ali Shah Social Sciences Allama Iqbal Open University Masters 4940 Prof. Syed Arif Kamal Physics University of Karachi PhD 4941 Dr. Syed Arslan Haider Social Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4942 Syed Asad Ali Shah Gillani 4943 Dr. Syed Awais Rouf Physics University of Education (Multan Campus) PhD 4944 Dr. Syed Ehtisham ul Haque Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4945 Dr. Syed Jawad Hussain Information Technology Sir Syed (CASE) Institute of Technology PhD 4946 Dr. Syed Muaz Masoom Shah Health Sciences Khyber College of Dentistry Bachelors 4947 Dr. Syed Muzamil Bokhari Physics University of Balochistan PhD 4948 Dr. Syed Naseem Hussain Shah Physics Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) PhD 4949 Dr. Syed Noor Muhammad Shah Agricultural Sciences Gomal University PhD 4950 Mr. Syed Rizwan Engineering Sciences Iqra University (North Campus) MPhil 4951 SYED YASIR SHAH 4952 Ms. Syeda Hoorulain Chemical Sciences HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry MPhil 4953 Dr. Syeda Kahkashan Kazmi Biological Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 4954 Dr. Syeda Nadia Ahmad Biological Sciences University of Chakwal PhD 4955 Dr. Syeda Rakhshanda Kaukab Social Sciences Zia-ud-Din University PhD 4956 Dr. Syeda Razia Bukhari Social Sciences Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science & Technology PhD 4957 Dr. Syeda Tehmina Ejaz Mathematics & Statistics Government Sadiq College Women University PhD 4958 Dr. Tahir Munir Butt Social Sciences University of Agriculture (Depalpur Campus) PhD 4959 Dr. Tahir Yaqub Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 4960 Dr. Tahira Amjad Health Sciences Foundation University Medical College Masters 4961 Dr. TAHSEEN FATIMA Agricultural Sciences Sindh Agriculture University PhD 4962 Talat Afza 4963 Dr. Tanveer Ahmad Agricultural Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4964 Dr. Tanveer Hussain Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 4965 Dr. Tanveer Hussain Agricultural Sciences Virtual University of Pakistan PhD 4966 Dr. Tanveer Ul Haq Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 4967 Dr. Taqdees Biological Sciences Jinnah University for Women PhD 4968 Dr. Tariq Aziz Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4969 Dr. Tariq Mahmood Biological Sciences Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University PhD 4970 Tariq Mehmood Khan 4971 Dr. Tarique Ahmed Maka Health Sciences National University of Medical Sciences Masters 4972 Dr. tasleem kausar Biological Sciences Government Sadiq College Women University PhD 4973 Mr. Tauqeer Ahmad Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) MPhil 4974 Tauseef Anwar 4975 Tayyab Jan 4976 Tofique Ahmed 4977 Tousif Hussain 4978 Ms. Ujala Rehan Information Technology Iqra University Bachelors 4979 Dr. Umar Farooq Agricultural Sciences Muhammad Nawaz Shareef University of Agriculture PhD 4980 Umer Awan 4981 Dr. Umer Farooq Ahmed Engineering Sciences Capital University of Science & Technology PhD 4982 Dr. Umer Sadique Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4983 Dr. Ummar Iqbal Biological Sciences Islamia University PhD 4984 Dr. Umm-e-Kalsoom Biological Sciences Hazara University PhD 4985 Ms. Urooj fatima Physics Government College for Women University PhD 4986 Dr. Urwah Ali Social Sciences Foundation University PhD 4987 Mr. Usman Ahmed Information Technology Foundation University MPhil 4988 Usman Ali 4989 Usman Aslam 4990 Dr. Usman Elahi Biological Sciences The Superior College PhD 4991 Dr. Usman Khalid Chaudhry Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pak EPA) PhD 4992 Dr. Uzma Hameed Biological Sciences Government College University PhD 4993 Uzma Nisar 4994 Uzma Shahid 4995 Dr. Uzma Urooj Biological Sciences Federal Urdu University of Arts, Sciences & Technology (Karachi Campus) MPhil 4996 Mr. Veer Bhan Engineering Sciences Sukkur Institute of Business Administration Masters 4997 Dr. Wafa Majeed Health Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 4998 Waheed Iqbal 4999 Dr. Wajad Ulfat Chemical Sciences University of Management & Technology PhD 5000 Dr. Wajid Nasim Jatoi Agricultural Sciences Islamia University PhD 5001 Wajiha Shahid 5002 Mr. Wali samad khan Biological Sciences Abdul Wali Khan University MPhil 5003 Mr. WAQAR AHMAD Earth Sciences Bahria University Masters 5004 Prof. Waqas Khalid Physics Air University PhD 5005 Waqas Safir 5006 Dr. Waqas Sarwar Abbasi Mathematics & Statistics Air University PhD 5007 Dr. Waqas ud Din Khan Agricultural Sciences Government College University PhD 5008 Dr. Waqas Wakil Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 5009 Ms. Warda Ejaz Social Sciences University of Lahore MPhil 5010 Ms. Warda Ejaz Social Sciences University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) MPhil 5011 Waseem Shehzad 5012 Mr. Wasi Ullah Information Technology University of Peshawar Masters 5013 Ms. Yafra Khan Information Technology Capital University of Science & Technology Masters 5014 Dr. Yasir hassan Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore PhD 5015 Dr. Yasir hassan Mathematics & Statistics University of Lahore (Sargodha Campus) PhD 5016 Dr. Yousaf Saeed Information Technology University of Haripur PhD 5017 Dr. Zafar Hayat Agricultural Sciences University of Veterinary & Animal Sciences PhD 5018 Dr. ZAFAR IQBAL Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 5019 Dr. Zaffar Mehmood Agricultural Sciences Forman Christian College PhD 5020 Mr. Zaheer Abbas Engineering Sciences Karakurum International University MPhil 5021 Zaheer Ahmed 5022 Dr. ZAHID ANWAR Social Sciences University of Peshawar PhD 5023 Dr. Zahid Hussain Mathematics & Statistics Karakurum International University PhD 5024 Dr. Zahid Munawar Biological Sciences Pak-Austria Fachhochschule Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology PhD 5025 Dr. Zahid Ullah Health Sciences Gomal Medical College PhD 5026 Dr. Zahir Shah Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 5027 Dr. Zain ul Abdin Agricultural Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 5028 Ms. zaira Health Sciences The University of Faisalabad MPhil 5029 Zakir Hussain 5030 Zakir Hussain 5031 Zannara Mustafa 5032 Dr. Zara Jabeen Biological Sciences Riphah International University PhD 5033 Zeenat Haq 5034 Dr. Zeeshan Alam Nayyar Physics University of Karachi PhD 5035 Mr. Zeeshan Ali Rahu Social Sciences Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University MPhil 5036 Zehra Hashim 5037 Dr. Zia ud Din Sindhu Health Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 5038 Dr. Zia ul Qamar Agricultural Sciences PAEC Nuclear Institute for Agriculture and Biology (NIAB) PhD 5039 Zia ur Rahman 5040 Mr. Zohaib Hassan Sain Multidisciplinary The Superior College PhD 5041 Dr. Zohaib Saeed Biological Sciences The University of Agriculture PhD 5042 Mr. Zohaib. Ali Information Technology The University of Faisalabad Masters 5043 Zonish Javed 5044 Dr. ZUBAIR ASLAM Biological Sciences University of Agriculture PhD 5045 Zulfiqar A. Saqib 5046 Prof. Zulfiqar Ali Memon Information Technology National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (Karachi Campus) PhD 5047 Dr. Zulfiqar Hussain Qadir Bux Information Technology Dawood University of Engineering & Technology PhD Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Scientific & Technological Periodicals Directory of Pakistan Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES PASTIC Periodicals Directory Directory of Scientific and Technological Periodicals of Pakistan is an online database of S&T periodicals including journals, magazines, digest, newspaper and secondary journals published in Pakistan. The aim of this database is to provide a full guide of S&T periodicals published from Pakistan and facilitate the users/researchers for searching periodicals/journals published in their respective disciplines. This database covers all the Pakistani periodicals of scientific subjects including social sciences. The information regarding periodicals can be searched by type of periodicals (primary journals, secondary journals and others), subject, title, HEC category and ISSN. Submit Your Journal for Indexing | Send Feedback | List of Ceased Titles | List of Acronyms to Abstracting & Indexing Service View By Subject: Click on the options below to filter your search. Life Sciences/Biology Plant Sciences Biology (General) Agricultural Sciences Animal & Veterinary Sciences Medical & Health Sciences Physical Sciences Physics Chemistry Earth Sciences Engineering Sciences & Technology Mathematics & Statistics Information Technology Inter/Multidisciplinary Multidisciplinary Information Sciences Environmental Sciences Social Sciences Social Sciences 709 Records Found advance search Periodical Action ADA: Architecture, Design & Art Magazine 21-D, Suite 301, 10th street off Khayaban-e-Shamsheer, Phase V, DHA Karachi-75600, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Advances in Animal and Veterinary Sciences Nexus Academic Publishers (NAP), Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Agriculture Times Muhammad Tahir, Flat no , Dar Plaza I&T Centre G-7/1, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Agro Veterinary News Mr Hashim Hasan , 3rd Floor, Mehmood Center, BC-11, Block-9, Clifton, More Details | Download Pdf Agrometeorological Bulletin of Pakistan National Agromet Centre, P.O. Box 1214, H-8/2, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Amali Science Syed and Syed (Publishers), 6 Thakurdas Building, 2nd Floor, M.A. Jinnah Road, P.O. Box # 683, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf ARPN Journal of Agriculture and Biological Science Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN), Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Asian Journal of Animal & Veterinary Advances Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Asian Journal of Clinical Nutrition Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Asian Journal of Crop Science Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf At the rate of internet Magazine Plot No 5, Expressway, Off Korangi Road, Karachi-74000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Business Review Institute of Business Administration, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Cotistics: Cotton Statistical Bulletin Pakistan Central Cotton Committee, Moulvi Tamizuddin Khan Road, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Criterion Quarterly House 16, Street 15, F-6/3, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Decadal Agromet Bulletin of Pakistan National Agromet Centre, P.O. Box 1214, H-8/2, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Dental News Pakistan Syed Hashim Hasan, Mahmood Centre, BC-11, Block 9, Clifton, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Dental Times Nadeem Yousaf, House # 141, Street # 4, Qasim Pura, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Engineering & Industrial Review Aftab Ahmed Iraqui, EIR House, R-156, Sector 15-A/4, BufferZone, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Engineering Review 305, Spotlie Chambers, Dr. Billimoria Street, Off I.I. Chundrigar Road, P.O. Box 807, Karachi-74200, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf eSci Journal of Crop Production eSci Journals Publishing, Defence Housing Authority, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf eSci Journal of Plant Pathology eSci Journals Publishing, Defence Housing Authority, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Farmer Views Pakistan Agro Livestock Poultry Opinion, Okaf Plaza Office No.8, Near District Hospital, Khushab Road, Sargodha, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Farming Outlook M. Tahir Saleem, Street-39, I-8/2, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Global Management Journal for Academic & Corporate Studies Bahria University (Karachi Campus), 13 Stadium Road, Karachi-75260, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Global Science 139, Sunny Plaza, Hasrat Mohani Road, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Ibex 692, Street no. 112, Sector G-9/3, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf International Journal of Agricultural Extension ESci Journals Publishing, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf International Journal of Agriculture and Biology Department of Botany, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad-38040, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf International Journal of Entomological Research ESci Journals Publishing, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf International Journal of Meat Science Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf International Journal of Poultry Science Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf IT Insight Mudassar Saeed Khan, 38-U, Street 43, G-8/2, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Joules Habib Ahmed Khan, P-32/2, 9th East Street, Phase 1, DHA, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Agriculture & Social Sciences Friends Science Publishers, P-25, St. 8, Rabani Colony Bankers, Faisalabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Agriculture Research Directorate of Agriculture Information, Agriculture Research Information Centre, Punjab, 21-Sir Agha Khan III Road, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Agronomy Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Animal and Veterinary Advances Medwell publishers More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Food Chemistry and Nutrition 157, Green View Colony, Faisalabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Food Resource Science Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Plant Breeding & Genetics ESci Journals Publishing, Islamabad, Pakistan; Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Pro Poor Growth ESci Journals Publishing, Islamabad, Pakistan; Department of Management Sciences, Room No. 307, Block A, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Journal of Veterinary and Animal Sciences University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Kisan Dharti Lok Sanijh Foundation, Near Office of the District Mauager Toyota (Vocational Institute) Hiran Minar Road, Sheikhupura, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Kisan Risala Mohammad Tariq Buchha, V-29, Street No.1, Phase II. Defence Housing Authority, Lahore-54792, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Kisan Times 12-Lawrence Road Lahore & Plot # 250, St. # 6, I-9/2, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Kisan World Chaudhary Iftikhar Ahmed Sandhu, F-52 Gosha Ahbab Housing Society Phase II, Azam Garden, Post Box Mansoora, Multan Road, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Management Outlook Pakistan Institute of Management (PIM), Management House, Clifton, Karachi-75600, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Medical Gazette Pakistan Medical Association (PMA), Aga Khan 3 Rd, Depot Lines, Saddar Town, Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Medical News Pakistan M Hassan Mahmood, Mahmood Centre, BC-11, Block 9, Clifton, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Medical Review 2, Mavani Chamber, Khushaldas StOff.I.I.Chundrigar Road, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Medical Spectrum Pakistan Medical Association (PMA), Aga Khan 3 Rd, Depot Lines, Saddar Town, Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf More Mudassar Jehangir Mufti, 2nd Floor, Ali Mansion, 41-A, Lower Mall, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Nabz Pakistan Medical Association (PMA) House, Agha Khan 3rd Road, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Natura World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)-Pakistan, Ferozepur Road, P.O. Box 5180, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf NetMag 56-C New Muslim Town Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan & Gulf Economist Economist Publications (Private) Limited, C-158/ B-2, Block-2 KDA Scheme-5, Clifton, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Dental Digest Pakistan Dental Digest, B/10, Commercial Area, Nazimabad-2, Karachi-74600, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Entomologist Pakistan Entomological Society, Department of Entomology, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad-3804, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Food Journal Suite B-4, & B-6, 2nd Floor, 64/21, Miran M. Shah Road, M.A.C.H.S, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Forest Digest Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI), 38, Street No , 86 Embassy Road, G-6/3 Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Economics Agricultural Prices Commission, Agricultural Policy Institute, Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock, GPO, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Research Directorate of Publications, Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC), P.O. Box 1031, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences Institute of Soil & Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Agriculture, Agricultural Engineering and Veterinary Sciences Sindh Agriculture University, Office of the Managing Editor, Tandojam, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Entomology Karachi Entomology Society of Karachi, Department of Zoology/Entomology, University of Karachi, Karachi-75270, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Food Science Pakistan Society of Food Scientists and Technologists (PSFST), Department of Food Technology, University of Faisalabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Nematology Pakistan Society of Nematologists, National Nematological Research Centre, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Nutrition Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Weed Science Research Weed Science Society of Pakistan, KPK Agricultural University, Peshawar-25130, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Wildlife Pakistan Wildlife Foundation, Basement Balochistan Plaza, Fazal-ul-Haq Road, Blue Area, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Journal of Zoology Researchers Links Ltd, 35 Oxford Road, Burnley, Lancashire BB11 3BB United Kingdom More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Special Magazine House #465, St. 74, Sector G-8/1, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Sugar Journal Shakarganj Sugar Research Institute, Shakarganj Mills Limited, Toba Road, Jhang, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Textile Journal Nadeem Mazhar, Ebrahim Building 20, West Wharf Road, P.O. Box No.4072, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pakistan Veterinary Journal Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Prescriber: Medical Newspaper UIB Group Suit # 9, Amber Court Shaheed-e-Millat Road Off, Shahrah-e-Faisal, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Pulse International Professional Medical Publications, Room No. 522, 5th Floor, Panorama Centre, Bldg. No. 2, Raja Ghazanfa Ali Road, Saddar, Karachi - Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Punjab University Journal of Zoology Department of Zoology, University of the Punjab (PU), Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Quest for Excellence Quality and Productivity Society of Pakistan (QPSP), 23-L, Gulberg-III, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Records: Zoological Survey of Pakistan Zoological Survey of Pakistan, Government of Pakistan, Kiani Road, Bhara Kahu, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Research Opinions in Animal & Veterinary Sciences KPK Publishers, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Reviews in Veterinary and Animal Sciences Department of Veterinary Parasitology, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad-38040, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Sarhad Journal of Agriculture KPK Agricultural University, Peshawar, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Shifa News Shifa Publication, Shifa International Hospital, Sector H-8/4, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Spider Dawn Media Group, Haroon House Dr. Zia-ud-Din Ahmed Road, GPO Box 3740, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Subh-e-Nau Farrukh Chishtie, House # 330, Street # 24, Sector I-8/2, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf SUPARCO Astronomy and Astrophysics Bulletin Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commission (SUPARCO), Gulzar-e-Hijri Off University Road, Sector 28, SUPARCO, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Techno Biz Shahid Ahmed Khan, Suit No.314, 3rd Floor, Eden Tower Main Boulevard, Gulberg-III, Lahore Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Technology Roundup: E Bulletin Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Centre (PASTIC), P.O.Box-1217, Quaid-e-Azam University Campus, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Technology Times S A Mustafa, 1st Floor, 86 South, Wali Center, Blue Area, Islamabad, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf The Veterinary News and Views Dr.Khalid Mahmood Shouq, 392-A, Samanabad, More Details | Download Pdf Trade Marks Journal Plot No CD-3, Behind KDA Civic Centre, 3rd, 4th & 5th Floor Defunct CCI & E Building Gulshan-e-Iqbal, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Trends in Agricultural Economic Asian Network for Scientific Information (ANSI), 308-Lasani Town, Sargodha Road, Faisalabad-38000, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Tripple Bottom Line Asiatic Public Relations Network, A-7, Street 1, Bath Island, Clifton, Karachi, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Urdu Science Magazine Urdu Science Board, Ministry of National Heritage and Integration, Governemnt of Pakistan, 299 Upper Mall, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Way Ahead International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), 1 Bath Island Road, Karachi-75530, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Zaraat-e-Sarhad Bureau of Agricultural Information, Agricultural Department, Peshawar, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Zarat-e-Baluchistan Directorate of Agriculture Information, Rani Bagh Sariab Road, More Details | Download Pdf Zari Service National Fertilizer Marketing Limited, P.O. Box No. 610, 53-Jail Road, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf Zirat-Nama Directorate of Agricultural information, Agriculture Department, Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan More Details | Download Pdf 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | S&T Libraries - Directory of Science & Technology Libraries in Pakistan Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES S & T Libraries S & T Libraries is a comprehensive database listing libraries across various disciplines, providing details on their book collections and resources. Our platform serves as a directory for students, researchers, and professionals to find libraries that meet their academic and research needs. With an extensive catalog of library listings, we help users easily access information about available books and subjects Libraries Action Abbottabad International Medical College Established: 2002 More Details Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute, Ayub Agriculture Research Institute (AARI), Faisalabad Established: 1987 More Details Agricultural Mechanization Research Institute (AMRI), Multan Established: 1978 More Details Agriculture Research System Established: 1908 More Details Al-Awan Welfare Organization Established: 1980 More Details Allama Iqbal Medical College Lahore Established: 1975 More Details Allama Iqbal open University Established: 1974 More Details Arid Zone Research Centre (PARC) Established: 1980 More Details Ayub Agricultural Research Institute Established: 1962 More Details Ayub Medical College Abbottabad Established: 1979 More Details Bahauddin Zakariya University Sub-Campus, Sahiwal Established: 2005 More Details Bahria University Islamabad Established: 2000 More Details Bait al -Hikmah The Hamdard Library Established: More Details Balochistan University of Engineering & Technology, Khuzdar Established: 1987 More Details Baqi Dental Collage Established: 1992 More Details Barani Agricultural Research Institute, Chakwal Established: 1979 More Details Central Cotton Research Institute, Multan Established: 1970 More Details Central Cotton Research Institute, Sakrand Pakistan Central Cotton Committee Established: 1977 More Details Central Forest Library, Pakistan Forest Institute, Peshawar Established: 1966 More Details Central Library Agriculture Research Institute Sariab Quetta Established: 1958 More Details Central Library International Islamic University, Islamabad Established: 1980 More Details Central Library, University of Balochistan, Quetta Established: 1970 More Details Central Library, University of Peshawar Established: 1951 More Details Centre for Advanced Studies in Engineering (CASE) Established: More Details Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology, Lahore Established: 1984 More Details Chandka Medical College Larkana Established: 1973 More Details City University, Peshawar Established: 2001 More Details CMH Lahore Medical College Established: 2006 More Details COMSATS Institute of Information Technology Established: 1998 More Details Department of Fisheries Sindh, Research & Development, Karachi Established: 2000 More Details Directorate of Barani Livestock Production Established: 1986 More Details Directorate of Fodder Research Institute Sargodha Established: 1981 More Details Directorate of Livestock Production Research Institute Bahadur Nagar Form (Okara) Established: More Details Dr. A.Q. Khan Research Laboratories, Govt Of PAKISTAN , P.O Box No 502, Rawalpindi Established: 1974 More Details Dr. Mahmud Hussain Library Established: 1952 More Details Dr. Raziuddin Siddiqi Memorial Library, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad Established: 1970 More Details Drainage Research Centre Established: 1975 More Details Faisalabad Institute of Research, Science & Technology Established: 2005 More Details Fatima Jinnah Women University Established: 1998 More Details Fishries Research and Training Institute Established: 1986 More Details FMH College of Medicine & Dentistry Established: 2000 More Details Forman Christan College Established: 1864 More Details Foundation University Medical College Established: 2000 More Details Frontier Medical College Established: 1996 More Details Fuel Research Centre PCSIR, Karachi Established: 1988 More Details Garrison Post Graduate College for Women, Lahore Established: 1990 More Details GC University Lahore Established: 1892 More Details GC University, Faisalabad Established: 2002 More Details Geo Science Advanced Research Labs. GSP Islamabad Established: 1991 More Details Geological Survey of Pakistan Established: 1947 More Details GIK Institute of Engineeering Sciences & Technology Established: 1993 More Details Greenwich University Established: 1998 More Details Gulab Devi Hospital Library Established: 2001 More Details Hazara University Mansehra Established: 2002 More Details Health Services Academy Established: 1988 More Details Horticultural Research Station, Sahiwal Established: 1974 More Details Hydrocarbon Development Institute of Pakistan Established: 1974 More Details Institute of Business Administration (IBA) Established: 1954 More Details Institute of Communication Technologies /PTCH Academy Established: 1994 More Details Institute of Industrial Electronics Engineering Established: 1989 More Details Institute of Management Sciences Established: 1995 More Details Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Oncology Lahore (INMOL) Established: 1982 More Details Institute of Policy Studies Established: 1979 More Details Institute of Space Technology Established: 2002 More Details Institute of Strategic Studies Established: 1973 More Details International Islamic University Established: 1980 More Details Islamabad Medical & Dental College Established: 1997 More Details Ittefaq Hospital (Trust) Established: More Details Jinnah University for Women Established: 1998 More Details Khadim Ali Shah Bukhari Institute of Technology (KASBIT) Established: 1999 More Details Khyber Medical College Peshawar Established: 1954 More Details Khyber Medical College, Peshawar Established: 1954 More Details King Edward Medical University Established: 1860 More Details Kinnaird College Established: More Details Kinnaird College for Women Established: 1913 More Details Lahore College for Women University Established: 1927 More Details Lahore University of Management Sciences Established: 1985 More Details Library of the Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology and Genetic Resource, National Agricultural Research Centre Established: 2007 More Details Margalla Institute of Health Sciences, Islamabad Established: 1997 More Details Marine Fisheries Department Established: 1951 More Details Marine Reference Collection & Resource Centre (MRC&RC) Established: 1967 More Details Mehran University of Engineering & Technology Established: 1977 More Details Muhammad Medical College Established: 1999 More Details National College of Arts Established: 1875 More Details National Defence University Library Established: 1970 More Details National Fertilizer Development Centre Established: 1985 More Details National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE) Established: 1988 More Details National Institute of Electronics Established: 1979 More Details National Institute of Management (NIM) Established: 1952 More Details National Institute of Management NIM (Former NIPA) Established: 1952 More Details National Institute of Oceanography Established: 1981 More Details National Library of Agricultural Sciences, National Agricultural Research Centre (NARC) Established: 1984 More Details National Library of Pakistan Established: 1993 More Details National Research Institute of Fertility Care (NRIFC) Established: 1962 More Details National Sugar Crops Research Institute Established: 1986 More Details National Textile University Established: 2002 More Details National Transport Research Centre, Ministry of Communication Established: 1974 More Details National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences (FAST) Established: 1996 More Details National Veterinary Laboratories, M/o Food, Agriculture & Livestock Established: 2004 More Details NED University of Engineering & Technology Established: 1977 More Details Nuclear Institute for Agriculture and Biology (NIAB) Established: 1972 More Details Nuclear Institute for Food & Agriculture Established: 1982 More Details Nuclear Institute of Agriculture (NIA) Established: 1963 More Details Nuclear Medicine Oncology & Radiotherapy Institute (NORI) Islamabad Established: 1983 More Details NWFP Agricultural University Established: 1981 More Details Oilseeds Research Institute, Faisalabad Established: 1975 More Details PAK-AIMS (Institute of Management Sciences) Established: 1986 More Details Pakistan Academy for Rural Development, National Institute of Management, Peshawar, Pakistan Provincial Services Academy Established: 1960 More Details Pakistan Agriculture Research Council Established: 1976 More Details Pakistan Council for Science & Technology Established: 1962 More Details Pakistan Council of Renewable Energy Technologies Established: 1982 More Details Pakistan Council of Scientific & Industrial Research Laboratories Complex Established: 1955 More Details Pakistan Forest Institute, Peshawar Established: More Details Pakistan Institute of Cotton Research & Technology, Pakistan Central Cotton Committee, Karachi Established: 1956 More Details Pakistan Institute of Development Economics Established: 1957 More Details Pakistan Institute of Engineering & Applied Sciences (PIEAS) Established: 2000 More Details Pakistan Institute of Management (PIM) Established: 1954 More Details Pakistan Institute of Technology for Minerals & Advanced Engineering Materials Established: 2003 More Details Pakistan Materiological Department Established: 1947 More Details Pakistan Mineral Development Corporation Established: 1979 More Details Pakistan Telecommunication Authority Established: 1996 More Details PCSIR Laboratories Complex, Karachi Established: 1954 More Details PCSIR Laboratories, Hyderabad Established: 1985 More Details Peshawar Medical College Library Established: 2005 More Details Poultry Research Institute Established: 1978 More Details Preston University Islamabad Established: 1982 More Details Preston University, Kohat Established: 1984 More Details PTCL Academy Established: 1994 More Details Punjab Institute of Cardiology Established: 1989 More Details Quaid - e- Azam Library Established: 1984 More Details Quaid-e-Azam Medical College Bahawalpur Established: 1972-73 More Details Quaid-e-Azam University of Engineering Science & Technology Established: 1996 More Details Saidu Medical College Established: 1998 More Details Satellite Research & Development Centre, SUPARCO Established: 1961 More Details School of Allied Health Sciences, Children Hospitals & Institute of Child Health Lahore Established: 1999 More Details Shaukat Khanum Memorial Cancer Hospital Established: More Details Sheikh Zayed Medical College / Hospital Established: 2003 More Details Shifa College of Medicine Established: 1998 More Details Sindh Agriculture University, Tando Jam Established: 1939 More Details Sindh Horticulture Institute Established: 1904 More Details Soil & Water Conservation Research Institute Chakwal Established: 1989 More Details Soil Survey of Pakistan Established: 1963 More Details Space & Upper Atmosphere Research Commission Pakistan (SUPARCO) Headquarters Established: 09-12-1961 More Details Space & Upper Atmosphere Research Commission Pakistan (SUPARCO) Karachi Established: More Details Sukkur Institute of Business Administration Established: 1994 More Details Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI) Established: 1992 More Details Telephone Industries of Pakistan Established: 1956 More Details The Islamia University of Bahawlpur Established: 1975 More Details The Lahore Chamber of Commerce and Industry Established: 1923 More Details The University of Faisalabad Library Established: 2002 More Details University College of Medicine, The University of Lahore Established: More Details University of Agriculture, Faisalabad Established: 1961 More Details University of Central Punjab, Lahore Established: 1990 More Details University of Education Established: 2002 More Details University of Engineering & Technology (Lahore) Faisalabad Campus Established: 2004 More Details University of Gujrat Established: 2006 More Details University of Sargodha Established: 2002 More Details University of Science & Technology Established: 2005 More Details University of Sindh Established: 1947 More Details University of the Punjab, Lahore Established: 1882 More Details Veterinary Research Institute, Lahore Established: 1963 More Details Veterinary Research Institute, Peshawar Established: 1949 More Details Virtual University of Pakistan Established: 2002 More Details Wah Medical College Established: 2003 More Details Women Medical College, Murree Road, Abbottabad Established: 1999 More Details Zari Taraqiati Bank Limited Established: More Details Zari Taraqiati Bank Limited (ZTBL) Established: 1980 More Details Ziauddin University Established: 1996 More Details Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad Project Detail Close
PASTIC | R&D and S&T Organizations of Pakistan Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES R&D/S&T ORGANIZATIONS OF PAKISTAN Federal Punjab Sindh Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Balochistan Azad Jammu and Kashmir Gilgit-Baltistan Plant Breeders' Rights Registry (PBRR) , PBRR Headquarters, Muave Area G-9/4,Islamabad Pakistan Meteorological Department, Islamabad Global Change Impact Studies Centre (GCISC), Islamabad Zoological Survey Department, Karachi, Sindh Pakistan Tobacco Board (PTB), Hayatabad, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Tobacco Research Station, PTB, Mardan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Tobacco Research Sub-station, PTB, Mansehra, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Tobacco Research Sub-station, PTB, Kunjah, Gujrat, Punjab Tobacco Research Sub-station, PTB, Okara, Punjab Tobacco Research Station, PTB, Swat, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Tobacco Model Farm, PTB, Buner, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Tobacco Model Farm, PTB, Hazro, Attock, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Tobacco Model Farm, PTB, Jampur, Punjab Tobacco Model Farm, PTB, Pishin, Balochistan Tobacco Model Farm, PTB, Dadu, Sindh Armament Research and Development Establishment (ARDE), Rawalpindi, Punjab Defence Science & Technology Organization (DESTO), Rawalpindi, Punjab Institute of Optronics , Rawalpindi, Punjab Military Vehicles Research and Development Establishment, Rawalpindi, Punjab Pakistan Aeronautical Complex, Kamra, Attock, Punjab Geological Survey of Pakistan (GSP), Islamabad Hydrocarbon Development Institute of Pakistan (HDIP), Islamabad National Fertilizer Corporation of Pakistan (NFCP), Lahore, Punjab NFC Institute of Engineering & Fertilizer Research, Faisalabad, Punjab Technology Upgradation and Skill Development Company (TUSDEC), Lahore, Punjab Cement Research and Development Institute, Lahore, Punjab Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC), Islamabad National Agricultural Research Centre (NARC), Islamabad Agricultural Economics Research Institute (AERI), NARC-PARC, Islamabad Agricultural Engineering Institute (AEI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Agriculture Poly Technique Institute (API) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Animal Sciences Institute (ASI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Bio Resources Conservation Institute (BCI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Climate, Energy and Water Research Institute (CEWRI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Crop Diseases Research Institute (CDRI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Crop Sciences Institute (CSI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Food Science Research Institute (FSRI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Honeybee Research Institute (HBRI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Horticulture Research Institute (HRI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Institute for Microbial Culture Collection of Pakistan (IMCCP) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Institute of Plant & Environmental Protection (IPEP) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Land Resources Research Institute (LRRI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad National Institute for Genomics and Advanced Biotechnology (NIGAB) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Rangeland Research Institute (RRI) , NARC-PARC, Islamabad Mountain Agricultural Research Centre (MARC), NARC-PARC, Jaglot, Gilgit, Gilgit-Baltistan Medicinal Plants Research Unit, MARC- NARC-PARC, Jaglot, Gilgit, Gilgit-Baltistan Trout Research & Multiplication Center, MARC-NARC-PARC, Jaglot, Gilgit, Gilgit-Baltistan Special Crops Unit, MARC-NARC-PARC, Jaglot, Gilgit, Gilgit-Baltistan Seabuckthorn Research Unit, MARC- NARC-PARC, Jaglot, Gilgit, Gilgit-Baltistan PARC National Tee & High Value Crops Research Institute", Shinkiari, Mansehra, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC Balochistan Agricultural Research & Development Center (BARDC), Quetta, Balochistan Coastal Research Institute, PARC-BARDC, Lasbella, Balochistan Horticulture Research Institute, PARC-BARDC, Khuzdar, Balochistan Livestock Research Institute, PARC-BARDC, Turbat, Balochistan Agricultural Research Institute, PARC-BARDC, Jafferabad, Balochistan Agricultural Research Institute Barkhan, PARC-BARDC, Rakhni, Balochistan Southern-Zone Agricultural Research Centre (SARC), NARC-PARC, Karachi, Sindh Arid Zone Research Institute, SARC- NARC-PARC, Umerkot, Sindh Coastal Agricultural Research Station, SARC- NARC-PARC, Karachi, Sindh National Sugar Crop Research Institute, SARC- NARC-PARC, Thatta, Sindh Crop Diseases Research Institute, SARC- NARC-PARC, Karachi, Sindh Grain Storage Research Institute, SARC- NARC-PARC, Karachi, Sindh Pesticide Research, SARC- NARC-PARC, Karachi, Sindh Vertebrate Pest Control, SARC-NARC-PARC, Karachi, Sindh Livestock & Fisheries Research Unit, SARC- NARC-PARC, Malir Halt, Karachi, Sindh National Sugar Crops Research Institute, SARC- NARC-PARC, Makli, Thatta, Sindh PARC Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI), Rattta Kulachi, Dera Ismail Khan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI), Quetta, Balochistan PARC-Summer Agricultural Research Station, Kaghan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC-Azad Jammu Kashmir Medicinal & Aromatic Plants Herbarium (AJKMAPH), Abbaspur, Azad Jammu and Kashmir PARC Institute of Advanced Studies in Agriculture (PIASA), NARC, Islamabad PARC Research and Training Station, Bahauddin Zakariya University , Multan, Punjab PARC Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI) Technology Field Station, Khairpur, Sindh PARC Participatory Field Research Station, Tarnab, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC Agricultural Research Station, Asstore, Gilgit-Baltistan PARC Agricultural Research Station, Chilas, Diamir, Gilgit-Baltistan PARC Agricultural Research Station, Skardu, Gilgit-Baltistan PARC Agricultural Research Station, Chitral, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC-Water and Agricultural Waste Management Institue (PARC-WAWMI), Tandojam, Sindh PARC Rice Research Institute, Bahawalpur PARC Thal Agricultural Reserach Development & Polytech Institute, District, Khushab, Punjab PARC Social Sciences Research Institute, AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab PARC Adaptive Research cum Demonstration institute, Matora, Lakki Marwat, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC Adaptive Research cum Demonstration Institute, Seakach, Wana, South Waziristan Agency, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC Adaptive Research cum Demonstration Institute, Miran Shah, North Waziristan Agency, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC Social Sciences Research Institute, Agriculture Complex Gojra, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu and Kashmir PARC Adaptive Research Cum Demonstration Insitute, Tank, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC Agricultural Research Institute, ARI, Turbet, Balochistan PARC Agricultural Research Institute, Jaffarabad, Balochistan ARC Agricultural Research Institute, Barkhan at Rakhni, Balochistan PARC Social Sciences Research Institute, ARI, Tandojam, Sindh PARC Social Sciences Research Institute, ARI, Tarnab, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC National Tea & High Value Crops Research Institute", Shinkiari, Mansehra, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa PARC Arid Zone Research Centre, Rata Kulachi, D.I. Khan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI), Bhawalpur, Punjab Pakistan Central Cotton Committee (PCCC), Multan, Punjab National Research Institute of Fertility Care, Karachi, Sindh National Institute of Health (NIH), Islamabad National Research Institute of Fertility Control, Lahore, Punjab Pakistan Health Research Council (PHRC), Islamabad Council for Works and Housing Research (CWHR), Karachi, Sindh National Institute of Electronics (NIE), Islamabad National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Karachi, Sindh Pakistan Council of Renewable Energy Technologies (PCRET), Islamabad Pakistan Council for Research in Water Resources (PCRWR), Islamabad Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR), Islamabad Pakistan Science Foundation (PSF), Islamabad Pakistan Museum of Natural History (PMNH), Islamabad Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Centre (PASTIC), Islamabad International Waterlogging and Salinity Research Institute, Lahore, Punjab Khan Research Laboratories (KRL), Rawalpindi, Punjab Institute of Biomedical and Genetic Engineering (IBGE), Islamabad National Centre for Physics (NCP), Islamabad National Engineering and Scientific Commission (NESCOM), Islamabad Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC), Islamabad Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commission (SUPARCO), Karachi National Radio Telecommunication Corporation (NRTC), (Pvt) Ltd, T&T Complex, Haripur, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Heavy Industries Taxila (HIT), Taxila, Punjab Heavy Mechanical Complex-3 (HMC-3), Taxila, Punjab Pakistan Ordnance Factories (POF), Wah Cantt, Rawalpindi, Punjab Karachi Shipyard & Engineering Works (KS&EW), Karachi, Sindh Pakistan Machine Tool Factory (PMTF), (Pvt) Ltd., Karachi, Sindh Peoples Steel Mills Limited, Manghopir, Karachi, Sindh Global Industrial & Defence Solution (GIDS), Rawalpindi, Punjab National Forensic Science Agency (NFSA), Islamabad National Vocational & Technical Training Commission (NAVTTC), Islamabad Oil and Gas Development Company Limited (OGDCL), Islamabad Oil and Gas Regulatory Authority (OGRA), Islamabad Pakistan Bureau of Statistics (PBS), Islamabad Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA), Islamabad Pakistan Veterinary Medical Council (PVMC), Islamabad PTCL Academy, Islamabad Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD), Islamabad Survey of Pakistan, Rawalpindi, Punjab PAK Public Works Department (PWD) , Islamabad Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science & Technology (PINSTECH), PAEC, Nilore, Islamabad Pakistan Naval Dockyard, Karachi, Sindh Precision Engineering Complex (PEC), Karachi, Sindh Pakistan Environmental Planning and Agricultural Consultants (PEPAC), Islamabad Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pak EPA), Islamabad Zoological Survey of Pakistan, Islamabad Trade Development Authority of Pakistan (TDAP), Karachi, Sindh Trade Dispute Resolution Organization, Islamabad National Insurance Company Limited (NICL), Karachi, Sindh State Life Insurance Corporation of Pakistan, Karachi, Sindh Trading Corporation of Pakistan (Pvt) Limited, Karachi, Sindh National Tariff Commission, Islamabad Directorate General of Trade Organisations, Islamabad Pakistan Institute of Trade and Development (PITAD; formerly Foreign Trade Institute of Pakistan (FTIP), Islamabad Intellectual Property Organization of Pakistan (IPO-Pakistan), Islamabad Pakistan Horticulture Development and Export Company (PHDEC; formerly Pakistan Horticulture Development and Export Board, PHDEB), Islamabad Construction Technology Training Institute (CTTI), Islamabad National Highway Authority (NHA), Islamabad National Transport Research Centre (NTRC), Islamabad National Highways & Motorway Police, Islamabad Gwadar Port Authority, Gwadar, Balochistan Government Shipping Office, Karachi, Sindh Karachi Port Trust , KPT Head Office Building, Karachi, Sindh Mercantile Marine Department, Karachi, Sindh Pakistan Marine Academy, Karachi, Sindh Pakistan National Shipping Corporation (PNSC), Karachi, Sindh Port Qasim Authority, Bin Qasim, Karachi, Sindh Central Power Purchasing Agency (CPPA) , Islamabad National Transmission & Despatch Company (NTDC) , Islamabad Private Power and Infrastructure Board (PPIB), Islamabad National Engineering Services Pakistan (NESPAK), Islamabad Alternative Energy Development Board (AEDB), Islamabad National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Authority (NEECA), Islamabad National Talent Pool (NTP), Islamabad National Training Bureau (NTB), Islamabad Pakistan Manpower Institute (PMI), Islamabad Pakistan National Commission for UNESCO (PNCU), Islamabad Private Educational Institutions Regulatory Authority (PEIRA), Islamabad Academy of Educational Planning and Management (AEPAM), Islamabad Higher Education Commission (HEC), Islamabad National Commission for Human Development (NCHD), Islamabad National Education Assessment System (NEAS), Islamabad National Education Foundation (NEF), Islamabad Railway Constructions Pakistan Limited (RAILCOP), Islamabad Pakistan Railway Advisory & Consultancy Services (PRACS), Rawalpindi Special Communications Organization (SCO), Rawalpindi, Punjab Telecom Foundation, Islamabad Telephone Industries of Pakistan (TIP), Haripur, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa National Incubation Center, Islamabad Indus River System Authority Water & Power (IRSA), Islamabad IGNITE, Islamabad Universal Service Fund (USF), Islamabad Pakistan Software Export Board (PSEB), Islamabad Department of Plant Protection (DPP), Islamabad Federal Seed Certification & Registration Department (FSC&RD), Islamabad Federal Water Management Cell (FWM), Islamabad Fisheries Development Board (FDB), Islamabad Livestock and Dairy Development Board, Islamabad National Fertilizer Development Centre, Islamabad Pakistan Oilseed Development Board (PODB), Islamabad Animal Quarantine Department (AQD), Karachi, Sindh National Veterinary Lab (NVL), Islamabad Agriculture Policy Institute (API), Islamabad Pakistan Agricultural Storage & Services Corporation (PASSCO), Lahore, Punjab Livestock and Dairy Development Board (LDDB), Islamabad Pakistan Medical and Dental Council (PM&DC), Islamabad National Trust for Population Welfare (NATPOW) , Islamabad Pakistan Nursing Council (PNC), Islamabad Pharmacy Council of Pakistan, Islamabad Tobacco Control Cell, Islamabad National Council for Homoeopathy, Rawalpindi Pakistan College of Physicians and Surgeons (CPSP), Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Central Health Establishment , Islamabad Directorate of Central Warehouse and Supplies Planning, Karachi, Sindh Drug Regulatory Authority of Pakistan (DRAP), Islamabad Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI) , Islamabad Health Services Academy, Islamabad National Council for Tibb, Islamabad National Institute of Population Studies (NIPS), Islamabad Pakistan Red Crescent, Islamabad National Health Emergency Preparedness & Response Network (NHEPRN), Islamabad Engineering Development Board (EDB), Islamabad Pakistan Institute of Management (PIM), Karachi, Sindh Small and Medium Enterprises Development Authority (SMEDA), Lahore Karachi Export Processing Zone (KEPZ), Karachi, Sindh National Productivity Organization (NPO), Islamabad Pakistan Industrial Technical Assistance Centre, Lahore, Punjab Pakistan Industrial Development Corporation (PIDC), Karachi, Sindh Pakistan Stone Development Company (PASDEC), Islamabad Karachi Tools Dies & Moulds Centre (KTDMC), Karachi, Sindh Pakistan Gems and Jewellery Development Company (PGJDC), Karachi, Sindh Aik Hunar Aik Nagar (AHAN), Lahore, Punjab Pakistan Steel Mills, Karachi, Sindh ENAR Petrotech Services (Private) Limited, Karachi, Sindh Heavy Electrical Complex (HEC), Hattar Industrial Estate, Haripur, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pakistan Engineering Company (PECO), Lahore NFC-Institute of Engineering and Fertilizer Research (NFC-IEFR), Faisalabad National Industrial Parks Development & Management Company (NIP), Karachi, Sindh Pakistan Hunting & Sporting Arms Development Company (PHSADC), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Furniture Pakistan, Lahore Gujranwala Tools, Dies and Moulds Centre (GTDMC), Gujranwala, Punjab National Fertilizer Marketing Limited (NFML), Lahore, Punjab Ceramics Development and Training Complex (CDTC), Gujranwala, Punjab NFC-Institute of Engineering & Technology (NFC-IET), Multan, Punjab Department of Explosives (DOE), Rawalpindi, Punjab Pakistan Council for Science and Technology (PCST), Islamabad Pakistan Standards and Quality Control Authority (PSQCA), Islamabad Pakistan Engineering Council (PEC), Islamabad Pakistan National Accreditation Council (PNAC), Islamabad Pakistan Halal Authority, Islamabad STEDEC Technology Commercialization Corporation of Pakistan, (Private) Limited, Lahore, Punjab Agriculture Extension & Adaptive Research, Lahore, Punjab Agricultural Mechanization Research Institute, Multan, Punjab Institute of Sugarcane Research & Biological Control (ISRBC), Jaranwala, Faisalabad, Punjab Ayub Agricultural Research Institute (AARI), Faisalabad, Punjab Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute (ABRI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Agricultural Economics Section (AES), AARI , Faisalabad, Punjab Agronomic Research Institute (ARI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Arid Zone Research Institute (AZRI), AARI, Bhakkar , Punjab Barani Agricultural Research Institute (BARI), AARI, Chakwal, Punjab Citrus Research Institute (CRI), AARI, Sargodha, Punjab Climate Change Research Centre (CCRC), AARI , Faisalabad, Punjab CottonResearch Institute (CRI), AARI, Multan, Punjab Entomological Research Institute (ERI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Fodder Research Institute (FRI), AARI, Sargodha, Punjab Horticultural Research Institute (HRI), AARI , Faisalabad Institute of Soil Chemistry & Environmental Sciences (ISCES), AARI, Kala Shah Kaku, Punjab Maize & Millets Research Institute (MMRI), AARI, Yusafwala, Sahiwal, Punjab Mango Research Institute (MRI), AARI, Multan, Punjab Oilseeds Research Institute (ORI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Plant Pathology Research Institute (PPRI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Post Harvest Research Centre (PHRC), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Potato Research Institute (PRI), AARI, Sahiwal, Punjab Pulses Research Institute (PRI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Rapid Soil Fertility Research Institute (RSFRI), AARI, Lahore, Punjab Regional Agricultural Research Institute (RARI), Bahawalpur, Punjab Rice Research Institute (RRI), AARI, Kala Shah Kaku, Punjab Soil & Water Conservation Research Institute (SWCRI), AARI, Chakwal, Punjab Soil Salinity Research Institute (SSRI), AARI, Pindi Bhattian, Punjab Sugarcane Research Institute (SRI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Vegetable Research Institute (VRI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Wheat Research Institute (WRI), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Statistical Section (SS), AARI, Faisalabad, Punjab Directorate of Floriculture (T&R), Lahore, Punjab Building Research Station, Lahore, Punjab Punjab Forestry Research Institute, Gatwala, Faisalabad, Punjab Wildlife Research Center, Gatwala, Faisalabad, Punjab Fisheries Research & Training Institute Complex, Lahore, Punjab Road Research & Material Testing Institute, Lahore, Punjab Irrigation Research Institute, Lahore, Punjab Barani Livestock Production Research Institute, Kherimurat, Tehsil Fateh Jang, District Attock, Punjab Buffalo Research Institute, Pattoki, Punjab Livestock Production and Research Institute, Bahadurnagar, Okara, Punjab Poultry Research Institute, Rawalpindi, Punjab Research Center for Conservation of Indigenous Breeds, Jhang, Punjab Veterinary Research Institute, Lahore, Punjab Animal Nutrition Research Centre, Rakh Dera Chal, Lahore, Punjab National Institute for Biotechnology & Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), PAEC, Faisalabad, Punjab Nuclear Institute for Agriculture and Biology (NIAB), ), PAEC, Faisalabad Punjab Seed Corporation, Lahore, Punjab Punjab Bio Energy Company (Pvt.) Ltd, Lahore, Punjab Punjab Power Development Board (PPDB), Lahore, Punjab Chief Engineer Power (CEP), Lahore, Punjab Punjab Power Development Co. Ltd (PPDCL), Lahore, Punjab Quaid-e-Azam Solar Power (Pvt.) Limited, Lahore, Punjab Quaid-e-Azam Thermal Power (Private) Limited (QATPL), Lahore, Punjab Punjab Energy Holding Company Limited (PEHCL), Lahore, Punjab Punjab Energy Efficiency & Conservation Agency(PEECA), Lahore, Punjab Environment Protection Department, Lahore, Punjab Excise,Taxation & Narcotics Control Department, Lahore, Punjab Food Directorate, Lahore, Punjab Cane Commissioner, Lahore, Punjab Punjab Food Authority, Lahore, Punjab Forest, Wildlife & Fisheries Department, Lahore, Punjab Punjab Forestry Research Institute (PFRI) Gatwala, Faisalabad, Punjab Wildlife Research Center Gatwala, Faisalabad, Punjab Wildlife Training School Pirowal, District Khanewal, Punjab Fisheries Research & Training Institute Complex, Lahore, Punjab Specialized Healthcare & Medical Education Department, Lahore, Punjab Higher Education Department, Lahore, Punjab Inspectorate of Police, Lahore, Punjab Child Protection & Welfare Bureau, Lahore, Punjab Inspectorate of Prisons, Lahore, Punjab Directorate of Reclamation & Probation, Lahore, Punjab Directorate of Civil Defence, Lahore, Punjab Punjab Emergency Service (Rescue 1122) Lahore, Punjab Punjab Highway Patrolling Police, Lahore, Punjab Forensic Science Laboratory, Lahore, Punjab Baloch Levy, D.G Khan, , Punjab Border Military Police, D.G Khan, Punjab Border Military Police, Rajanpur, Punjab Housing, Urban Development & Public Health Engineering Department, Lahore, Punjab Industries, Commerce, Investment & Skills Development Department, Lahore, Punjab Information & Culture Department, Lahore, Punjab Punjab Irrigation Department, Lahore, Punjab Livestock and Dairy Development, Lahore, Punjab Management and Professional Development Department, Lahore, Punjab Mines and Minerals, Lahore, Punjab Planning and Development Board, Lahore, Punjab Bureau of Statistics Punjab, Lahore, Punjab Directorate General Monitoring & Evaluation P&D Department, Lahore, Punjab Punjab Information Technology Board (PITB), Lahore, Punjab Cholistan Development Authority, Bahawalpur, Punjab Punjab Economic Research Institute (PERI), Lahore, Punjab Engineering Consultancy Services Punjab (Pvt.) Ltd., Lahore, Punjab Punjab Reform Management Program (PRMP), Lahore, Punjab Agency for Barani Areas Development, Rawalpindi, Punjab Transport Department, Lahore, Punjab Women Development Department, Lahore, Punjab Youth Affairs, Sports, Archaeology and Tourism Department, Lahore, Punjab Road Research & Material Testing Institute, Lahore, Punjab Research Institute for Physiology of Animal Reproduction, Kasur, Punjab Livestock Experiment Station, Bahaduranagar, Punjab Livestock Experiment Station, Qadirabad, Punjab Fish Seed Hatchery (Government of Punjab), Rawal Town, Islamabad Fisheries Research and Training Institute, Manawa Fish Farm, Tulspura, Lahore, Punjab Foot and Mouth Disease Research Centre, Barki Rd, Lahore, Punjab Sheep and Goat Development Centre, Leiah, Punjab Soil Survey of Punjab, Lahore, Punjab Wool Research Laboratories, Bahawalpur, Punjab Agriculture Research Sindh, Tandojam, Sindh Research and Development Division (Forest & Wildlife Dept.), Hyderabad, Sindh Sindh Institute of Urology and Transplantation, Karachi, Sindh Hydrology and Research in Sindh, Hyderabad, Sindh Poultry Production and Research Institute, Karachi, Sindh Sindh Poultry Vaccine Centre, Karachi, Sindh Fisheries Research & Development, Karachi, Sindh Central Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, Tandojam, Sindh Central Cotton Research Institute, Nawabshah, Sindh Pakistan Institute of Cotton Research and Technology, Karachi, Sindh PERAC Research & Development Foundation, Karachi, Sindh Quaid-e-Awam Agriculture Research Institute, Naudero, Larkana, Sindh Silvicultural Research Division, Hyderabad, Sindh Nuclear Institute of Agriculture ( NIA ), PAEC, Tandojam, Sindh Agriculture, Supply & Prices Department, Karachi, Sindh Rice Research Institute, Larkana, Sindh Sindh Horticulture Research Institute, Mirpurkhas, Sindh Wheat Research Institute, Sakrand, Nawabshah, Sindh Foundation Seed Cell, Agriculture Research, Tandojam, Sindh Sugarcane Research Station,Sujawal, Sindh Sugarcane Research Station,Naudero, Sindh Oilseeds Research Station,Shikarpur, Sindh Oilseeds Research Station,Golarchi, Sindh Maize & Millet Research Station,Dadu, Sindh Sunflower Research Station,Sangi, Sindh Cotton Research Station,Ghotki, Sindh Horticulture Research Station, Mirpurkhas, Sindh Chillies Research Station, Mirpurkhas, Sindh Vegetable Research Station, Mirpurkhas, Sindh Date Palm Research Station, Kotdiji, Sindh Tomato Research Station, Badin, Sindh Onion Research Station, Husri, Hyderabad, Sindh Jujube Research Station, Tandojam, Sindh Coconut Research Station, Karachi, Sindh Citrus Research Station, Sakrand, Sindh Guava Research Station, Naudero, Sindh Chiku, Papaya and Banana Research Station, Ghulamullah, Sindh Pulses Research Station, Dokri, Sindh Rice Research Station, Thatta, Sindh Southern Wheat Research Station, Tandojam, Sindh Agriculture Research Sub-Station (Multi crop), Sakrand, Sindh Agriculture Research Sub-Station (Multi crop), Kotdiji, Sindh Agriculture Research Sub-Station (Multi crop), Shikarpur, Sindh Groundnut Research Sub-Station, Sanghar, Sindh Horticulture Research Sub-Station, Mirpurkhas, Sindh Horticulture Research Sub-Station, Kot Ghulam Muhammad, Sindh Vegetable Research Sub-Station, Mirpurkhas, Sindh Vegetable Research Sub-Station, Sarhad, Sindh Vegetable Research Sub-Station, Husri, Sindh Rice Research Sub-Station, Shikarpur, Sindh Auxiliary Seed Multiplication Farm, Nasirabad, Sindh Pulses Research Sub-Station, Tandojam, Sindh Bureau of Supply & Prices, Karachi, Sindh, Sindh Planning & Monitoring Cell, Karachi, Sindh Cane Commissioner, Karachi, Sindh Sindh Seed Corporation, Karachi, Sindh Board of Revenue Sindh, Karachi, Sindh Thar Coal Energy Board, Karachi, Sindh Cooperation Department, Karachi, Sindh Culture, Tourism, Sports, Youth Affairs and Social Welfare Department, Karachi, Sindh Excise & Taxation Department, , Karachi, Sindh Narcotics Control Wing of Excise, Taxation & Narcotics Control, Department Karachi, Sindh Food Department,Karachi,Sindh Forest , & Wildlife Department,Karachi,Sindh Higher, Technical Education & Research & School Education and Literacy Department, Karachi,Sindh Reform Support Unit (RSU), Karachi,Sindh Sindh Education Foundation (SEF), Karachi, Sindh Directorate General Monitoring & Evaluation (DGM&E), Education & Literacy Department, Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Inspection & Registration of Private Institutions, Karachi, Sindh Provincial Institute of Teacher Education (PITE), Shaheed Benazir Abad, Sindh Directorate of Teacher Training Institutions. Directorate of Curriculum Research and Assessment, Jamshoro, Sindh Sindh Teacher Education Development Authority (STEDA), Karachi, Sindh Sindh Textbook Board Jamshoro, Sindh Directorate of Curriculum, Assessment & Research Sindh, Jamshoro, Sindh Directorate Of Civil Defence Karachi,Sindh Directorate of Reclamation & ProbationKarachi,Sindh Inspectorate General of Prisons Karachi,Sindh Provincial Office Population Welfare Department, Karachi,Sindh Information Department Sindh, Karachi, Sindh Information, Science & Technology Department, Karachi,Sindh Industries & Commerce Department, Karachi,Sindh Sindh Small Industries Corporation ,Karachi,Sindh Sindh Industrial Trading Estates Ltd., Karachi,Sindh Irrigation Department, Karachi,Sindh Sindh Barrages Management (Gudu, Sukkur & Kotri), Karachi , Sindh Small Dams Organization (Darawat Dam Jamshoro, Chotiari Dam Sanghar, Nai Gaj Dam Gaj), Karachi,Sindh Sindh Irrigation and Drainage Authority (SIDA), Hyderabad , Sindh Soil Mech. Hydrology Lab, Sindh Directorate of Manpower and Training Sindh, Karachi, Sindh Sindh Workers Welfare Board, Karachi, Sindh Public Health Engineering Department, Karachi, Sindh Directorate General of Mines & Mineral Development, Karachi,Sindh Minority Affairs Department, Karachi,Sindh Planning & Development Department (P&D), , Karachi,Sindh Monitoring & Evaluation Cell, Karachi,Sindh Bureau of Statistics, Sindh Bureau of Statistics Complex, Karachi,Sindh Research & Training Wing, Karachi,Sindh Semen Production Unit, Breed Improvement Center, Rohri, Sindh Livestock Experimental Station (LES) Karachi, Sindh Red Sindhi Cattle Breeding Farm (RSCBF) Tando Muhammad Khan, Sindh Livestock Experiment Station NABISAR ROAD, Umerkot, Sindh Livestock Development and Research Farm for Kundhi Buffaloes, Rohri, Sukkur, Sindh Kamori Goat Farmkhudabad, Sindh Directorate of Fisheries Sindh (Marine), Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Fisheries Sindh (Inland) Hyderabad, Sindh Directorate of Fisheries (Research & Development) Sindh Directorate of Livestock (Planning & Monitoring) Hyderabad, Sindh Directorate of Poultry Production & Research, Karachi, Sindh Health Department Sindh, Karachi Sindh Medical Faculty, Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Nursing Sindh, Karachi, Sindh Nursing Examination Board , Karachi Directorate of Drug Control, Sindh Chemico-Bacteriological Laboratory, Karachi, Sindh Drug Testing Laboratory, Karachi, Sindh Sindh Blood Transfusion Authority, Karachi, Sindh Quality Control Board Sindh, Karachi, Sindh Office of Police Surgeon Sindh, Karachi, Sindh Provincial Health development Center, Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Pharmacy , Karachi, Sindh Electro-Medical Workshop, Jamshoro , Sindh Women Development Department, Karachi, Sindh Energy Department, Karachi, Sindh Sindh Energy Holding Company Limited (SEHCL), Directorate of Oil and Gas, Karachi, Sindh Sindh Petroleum Limited (SPL), Directorate of Oil and Gas, Karachi, Sindh Environment, Climate Change & Coastal Development Department Sindh, Karachi, Sindh Sindh Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA), Karachi, Sindh Sindh Coastal Development Authority (SCDA), Karachi, Sindh College Education Department, Karachi, Sindh Directorate General of Colleges Karachi, Sindh Sindh Education Policy Commission for Higher Education, Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Planning Development and Research for Colleges, Karachi, Sindh Sindhi Adabi Board, Karachi, Karachi, Sindh Education Works for Colleges, Karachi, Sindh Accreditation Board/Service Delivery Commission, Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Inspection/Registration of Private Colleges, Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Human Resource and Training for Colleges , Karachi, Sindh Directorate of Monitoring and Evaluation for Colleges Sindh, Karachi Benazir Bhutto Shaheed Youth Development Program (BBSYDP), Karachi, Sindh Sindh Poultry Vaccine Centre, Livestock Department Sindh, Karachi, Sindh Agriculture Research System, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Livestock Research and Dairy Development, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Veterinary Research Institute, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pakistan Forest Institute (PFI), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Nuclear Institute for Food & Agriculture (NIFA), ), PAEC, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bureau of Agriculture Information, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Agriculture Extension Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Training Institute (ATI), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Model Farm Services Centre (MFSC), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Marketing Section, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Plant Protection, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Planning and Development, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Horticulture, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Agriculture Research, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Outreach Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Research Institute, Tarnab, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Research Institute (North) Mingora , Swat, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Research Station Ahmad Wala Karak, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Research Station Baffa, Mansehra, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Research Station Serai Naurang, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Research Station, Buner, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Research Station, Seenlasht, Chitral, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural Research Institute, Dera Ismail Khan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Research Station, Swabi, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Barani Agricultural Research Station, Jarma, Kohat, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Cereal Crops Research Institute (Ccri), Pirsabak, Nowshera, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Hazara Agriculture Research Station (HARS), (previously Potato Research Centre), Abbottabad, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Sugar Crops Research Institute, Mardan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Livestock and Dairy Development, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Breed Improvement and Farms, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Animal Health and Production, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Epidemiology, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Planning, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Veterinary Public Health, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Livestock Production, Extension and Communication, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Cattle Breeding & Dairy Farm Harichand, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Livestock Experimentation Station, Balakot-Kaghan Rd, JABA Animal Husbandry In-service Training Institute (AHITI),Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Semen Production Unit (SPU) Harichand, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Buffalo Breeding Farm D.I. Khan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Agriculture Engineering, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate General of Soil Conservation(DGSC), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of OnFarm Water Management, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Cooperative Societies, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Fisheries, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Crop Reporting Services (CRS) , Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bureau of Statistics, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Communication & Works Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Archaeology & Museums, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Tourism Corporation KP, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pakhtunkhwa Energy Development Organization (PEDO), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Oil & Gas Company Limited (KPOGCL), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Food Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Food Directorate, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Forestry, Environment and Wildlife Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Forest Development Corporation Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (FDC), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Department of Health, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provincial Health Services Academy (PHSA), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Industries & Commerce, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Small Industries Development Board (SIDB), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Board of Investment & Trade, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Special Economic Zones Development and Management Company (KPEZDMC), Hayatabad, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Gadoon Industrial Estate, Swabi, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Hattar Special Economic Zone, Haripur, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Nowshera Industrial Estate, Bara Banda, Nowshera, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Risalpur Export Processing Zone, Bara Banda, Nowshera, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Hattar Industrial Estate, Hattar, Haripur, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Jalozai Industrial Estate, Nowshera, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar Industrial Estate, Hayatabad, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa KP-Trade Testing Board, within premises of Govt Technical and Vocational Centre (boys) Gulbahar Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa KPK Board of Technical Education, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigation Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Minerals Development Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Mineral Testing Laboratory, Hayatabad, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Public Health Engineering Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Science & Technology and Information Technology Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Science and Technology (DoST), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Khyber Pakhtunkhwa IT Board (KPITB), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Abbottabad IT Park, Abbottabad, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Transport and Mass Transit Department, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Directorate of Transport, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provincial Transport Authority (PTA), Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Regional Transport Authority, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Extension, Quetta, Balochistan Agriculture Research Institute, Quetta, Balochistan Beef Production Research Center, Sibi, Balochistan Multipurpose Sheep Research Station, Yetabad, Balochistan Wool Research Centre, Mastung, Balochistan Agriculture and Cooperatives, Quetta, Balochistan Communication and Works Department, Quetta, Balochistan Department of Culture, Archives and Tourism, Quetta, Balochistan Culture Directorate, Quetta, Balochistan Tourism Directorate, Quetta, Balochistan Archives Directorate, Quetta, Balochistan Environment, Sports & Youth Affairs Department, Quetta, Balochistan Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Quetta, Balochistan Directorate Sports, Quetta, Balochistan Youth Afffairs Directorate, Quetta, Balochistan Fisheries Department, Quetta, Balochistan Director General Fisheries, Quetta, Balochistan Director (Marine) Fisheries, Pasni, Balochistan Director (Inland) Fisheries, Quetta, Balochistan Deputy Director (Dams) Fisheries, Quetta, Balochistan Gwadar-Lasbela Livelihoods Support Project (GLLSP), Gwadar, Balochistan Food Department, Quetta, Balochistan Forests & Wildlife Department, Quetta, Balochistan Conservator of Forests, KhuzdarDivision, Balochistan Conservator of Forests, NasirabadDivision, Balochistan Conservator of Forests, TurbatDivision, Balochistan Conservator of Forests,Loralai Division, Balochistan Conservator of Forests,Sibi Division, Balochistan Conservator of Forests, Civil Division Quetta, Balochistan Department of Health, Quetta, Balochistan Department of Industries, Quetta, Balochistan Quetta Industrial and Trading Estate, Quetta, Balochistan Industrial Estate at Dera Murad Jamali, Balochistan Lasbela Industrial Estate, Lasbela, Balochistan Hub Industrial and Trading Estate, Hub, Balochistan Gwadar Industrial Estate, Gwadar, Balochistan Marble City Gaddani, Balochistan Winder Industrial Estate, Winder, Balochistan Irrigation Department, Quetta, Balochistan Directorate of Manpower Training, Quetta, Balochistan Workers Welfare Board, Quetta, Balochistan Directorate of Labour Welfare, Quetta, Balochistan Balochistan Employees Social Security Institution (BESSI), Quetta, Balochistan Balochistan -Technical Education & Vocational Training Authority (B-TEVTA), Quetta, Balochistan Livestock and Dairy Development Department, Quetta, Balochistan Director Research & Supplies, Quetta, Balochistan Director- Farms & Feed Resources, Quetta, Balochistan Director Animal Health & Production Extension, Quetta, Balochistan Animal Breeding Component, Quetta, Balochistan Semen Production Unit, Quetta, Balochistan Animal Nutrition Section (Feed mill), Quetta, Balochistan Epidemiology Section, Quetta, Balochistan Disease Investigation Lab, Quetta, Balochistan Small Ruminant Scheme, Loralai, Balochistan Rural Poultry Development Balochistan Quetta, Balochistan Cross Bred Farm, Turbat, Balochistan Cross Bred Farm, Kharan, Balochistan Cross Bred Farm, Dera Bugti, Balochistan Karakul Sheep Breeding Farm Maslakh, , Balochistan Poultry Farms, Dera Bugti, Balochistan Poultry Farms, Ziarat, Balochistan Poultry Farms, Kalat, Balochistan Poultry Farms, Turbat, Balochistan Poultry Farms, Kharan, Balochistan Multipurpose Sheep Research Station, Yetabad, Balochistan Para Veterinary Training Institute, Quetta, Balochistan Mines and Mineral Development Department, , Quetta, Balochistan Directorate General of Mines and Mineral, Quetta, Balochistan Inspectorate of Mines, Quetta, Balochistan MINES RESCUE AND TRAINING WING, Quetta, Balochistan Mines Labour Welfare Organization, Quetta, Balochistan Planning and Development (P&D) Department, Quetta, Balochistan Population Welfare Department, Quetta, Balochistan Public Health Engineering Department, Quetta, Balochistan Science & Information Technology Department, Quetta, Balochistan Printing and Stationery Department, Quetta, Balochistan Agriculture Department, Gojra, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Directorate General Tourism & Archaeology, Chattar Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Directorate Industries and Commerce, Lower Chatter, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Environment Protection Agency (EPA), Old Secretariat Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Forest Department, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Directorate General Health, New District Complex, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Higher Education of AJ&K, Old Secretariat Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir IT Board of AJ&K, Old Secretariat, District Complex, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Directorate General Livestock And Dairy Development Department, Domail, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Directorate Mineral Resources, District Complex, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Small Industries Corporation, New District Offices Complex, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir Water & Power Department, Gilgit-Baltistan Planning and Development Department, Gilgit-Baltistan Excise and Taxation Complex, Jutial Gilgit, Gilgit-Baltistan Tourism Secretariat, Jutial Gilgit, Gilgit-Baltistan Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Gilgit-Baltistan Agriculture Department, Gilgit-Baltistan Forest Department, Gilgit-Baltistan Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Directory of Scientific Societies & Associations in Pakistan Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Directory of Scientific Societies/Associations of Pakistan Total 83 Records Found Society/ Association Details Pakistan Association of Medical Editors ( PAME) Room No.522, 5th Floor, Panorama Centre, Building No.2, Raja Ghazanfar Ali Road, Saddar, Karachi View More Details Pakistan Society of Anaesthesiologists (PSA) Centre ( PSA) Room 1, Annex Building II, PMA House, Agha Khan III Road, Karachi-74400, Pakistan View More Details Pakistan Society Of Chemical Pathologists ( PSCP) Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Range Road, CMH Complex, Rawalpindi, Punjab ,Pakistan View More Details Pakistan Society of Criminology ( PSC) Pakistan Society of Criminology, Opposite, FAT Secretariat, Warsak Road, Peshawar, Kyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan View More Details Agricultural Foundation of Pakistan ( AFP) Pakistan Town, 44000 Islamabad, Pakistan View More Details Alkhidmat Foundation Pakistan ( AKF) Alkhidmat Complex, 3km Khayaban-e-Jinnah, Lahore, Punjab,Pakistan View More Details Biological Society of Pakistan ( BSP) Prof. Dr. Hamid Mukhtar, Professor/ Director Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, GC University Lahore, Pakistan View More Details Bolan Society for Pure and Applied Biology ( BSPAB) Bolan Society for Pure and Applied Biology (BSPAB), Office/Flat No. 2, First Floor Rehan Centre Sindhi Street,Masjid Road, Quetta, Balochistan-Pakistan View More Details Buraq Planetrary Society ( BURAQ) Building 16 MPCHS E-11/3, Islamabad,Pakistan View More Details Chemical Society of Pakistan ( C4S) Country Coordination Centre in Chemical Sciences (C4S), Department of Chemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan View More Details Horticultural Society of Pakistan ( HSP) P2,17th South Street Phase II DHA, Karachi-75500. Pakistan. View More Details Infection Control Society Pakistan ( ICSP) House # C3, Block D, Shahrah-e-Jahangir, North Nazimabad, Karachi, 74600,Pakistan and 1st Floor, 69-C, Block II PECHS, Karachi, Pakistan View More Details International Federation of Medical Students Associations-Pakistan ( IFSMA) Room 8A, FJMU Hostel, Waris Road, Lahore. View More Details Islamic Countries Society of Statistical Sciences ( ISOSS) 44-A, Civic Centre, Sabzazar Scheme, Multan Road, Lahore, Pakistan View More Details KhwarizmiScience Society ( KSS) Interdisciplinary Research Centre in Biomedical Materials (IRCBM) COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Defence Road, Off Raiwind Road, Lahore, Pakistan View More Details Lok Sanjh Foundation ( LSF) Web-based contact View More Details Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases Society of Pakistan ( MMIDSP) 21G/1, Block 6, P.E.C.H.S,Shahra-e-Faisal, Karachi, Pakistan View More Details Medical Research Society of Pakistan ( MRSP) Ms. Aniqa Agha, Shaukat Khanum Memorial Cancer Hospital & Research Centre, 7-A, Block R-3, Johar Town, Lahore,Pakistan View More Details Mycopathological Society of Pakistan ( MYCOPS) The President, MYCOPS, Institute of Mycology & Plant Pathology, University of the Punjab, Quaid-e-Azam Campus, Lahore 54590, Pakistan View More Details National Horticultural Society of Pakistan, Islamabad ( NHSP) 83, NHSP Plaza located at G-7, F-7, Fazal-ul-Haq, Road, Blue Area, Islamabad View More Details 1 2 3 4 5 Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad Project Detail Close
PASTIC | Search Union Catalogue - Research Material in Pakistani Libraries Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Search Union Catalogue PASTIC's Union Catalogue is the repository of all research material available in all libraries in Pakistan. This information is updated regularly. Note: The information on this page is currently being updated regularly. So if your desired information is not available, please visit this page in near future to find it again. Advance Search A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | JA | JB | JC | JD | JE | JF | JI | JK | JL | JM | JN | JO | JP | JQ | JR | JS | JT | JU | JV | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z Journals Aalam al-zarra: journal of the atomic energy commission of syria Aapg bulletin (formerly: american association of petroleum geologists bulletin) Aata news letter AATC Review ( American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists) Abasyn University Journal of Social Sciences Abb asea brown boveri Ability and Enterprise Abstract bulletin of the institute of paper chemistry Abstracts of bulgarian scientific literature biology Abstracts of bulgarian scientific literature chemistry Abstracts of bulgarian scientific literature maths and physical sciences Abstracts of bulgarian scientific medical literature Abstracts of mycology Abstracts of science and technology in japan: agriculture, forestry and fisheries Abstracts of science and technology in japan: energy technology Abstracts of soviet medical journal Abstracts of world medicine Abstracts on hygiene Abstracts on hygiene and communicable diseases Abstracts on tropical agriculture Academia economic papers Academic Emergency medicine (AEM: an official journal of the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine) Academic medicine Academic Research International Academy of management journal Acc current journal review Accessions list of pakistan Accessions list of south asia Accis newsletter Accountancy Accountant Accountants magazine Accounts of chemical research Ace articles in civil engineering Ach-models in chemistry Aci materials journal Aci structural journal Acm computing survey ACM Embernet ACM Journal of Computer Documentation Acm sigplan notices Acm transactions on graphics Acm transactions on modeling and computer simulation Acp journal club Acta Amazonica Acta anatomica Acta anthropologica sinica Acta applicandae mathematicae Acta Archaeologica Tomus Acta astronautica Acta astronomica sinica Acta Biochemica Polonica Acta biochimica et biophysica sinica Acta bio-medica Acta botanica sinica Acta chemica Acta chemica scandinavica Acta chemica scandinavica a: physical and inorganic chemistry Acta chemica sinica Acta crystallographica Acta crystallographica a crystal physics diffraction, theoretical and general crystallography Acta crystallographica b structural crystallography and crystal chemistry Acta crystallographica: sec d: biological crystallography Acta cytologica Acta electronica Acta endocrinologica Acta entomologica sinica Acta genetica sinica Acta geologica sinica Acta geophysica sinica Acta leidensia Acta mathematica sinica Acta mechanica Acta medica Acta medica austriaca Acta medica bulgarica Acta medica colombiana Acta medica enpirica/erfahrungsheilkunde Acta metallurgica Acta metallurgica sinica Acta metallurgica sinica (a) Acta metallurgica sinica (b) Acta microbiologica sinica Acta mineralogica pakistanica Acta neurochirurgica Acta orthopaedica scandinvica Acta otolaryngologica Acta paediatrica Acta paediatrica japonica Acta paediatrica scandinavica Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica Acta physica et chemica Acta physica polonica: a Acta physica polonica: b Acta physica sinica Acta physiologica scandinavica Acta phyto taxonomica sinica Acta psychiatrica scandinavica Acta Radiologica Acta scientia sinica Acta sericologica sinica Acta societatis botanicorum poloniae Acta technica academiae scientiarum hungaricae Acta Therapeutica Acta universitatis caroliae Acta urologica japonica Acta zoologica sinica Adab news Administration Administration journal Administrative science quarterly Adolescent Psychiatry Adsorption science and technology Advance Synthesis & catalysis Advanced imaging Advanced manufacturing technology Advanced materials Advanced materials and processes Advanced packaging Advances in agricultural research in egypt Advances in applied mathematics Advances in applied microbiology Advances in colloid and interface science Advances in nursing science Advances in physics Advances in psychology Advances in special electrometallurgy Advances in water resources Advent,The,India Aea meeting on atomic energy Aecl review Aeesca journal of engineering education Aegis international Aeronautical journal (formerly: journal of aeronautical society) Aerospace america Aerospace america Aerospace products Afghanistan Africa economic digest Africa recovery African journal of medicine and medical sciences Afro-asian journal of ophthalmology Afya a journal of medical and health workers Agexporter Agha khan health services international newsletters Agri business Agri digest Agribusiness worldwide Agricultural abstracts Agricultural abstracts bulletin Agricultural and biological chemistry Agricultural and rural development Agricultural economics Agricultural engineer Agricultural engineering Agricultural information development bulletin Agricultural Mechanization in Asia, Afirca and Latin America Agricultural research Agricultural sciences in china Agricultural situation in india Agricultural systems Agricultural water management Agriculture ecosystem and environment Agriculture forestry and fisheries finance Agriculture pakistan Agritrop agro links Agro veterinary news Agrochemical and radius news letter Agroforestry abstracts Agroforestry systems an international journal Agronomia tropical Agronomy journal AHA coding clinic for ICD-9-CM Aiaa bulletin Aiaa journal (formerly: journal of the royal aeronautical society) Aibs bulletin Aiche journal Aid research and development abstracts Aids Air craft engineering Air defence digest Air safety Ajr (american journal of roentgenology) Akhbar e tib Akhbar e urdu Al-balagh Aldri chemica acta Al-farooq: new approach to journalism Algal Flora of Korea Al-hikmat All pakistan legal decisions Alloys index Al-Magazine Al-Siyasa Aluminium Aluminium industry abstracts Ama: agricultural mechanization in asia, africa and latin america Ambio: a journal of the human environment American anthropologist American Antiquity American Archivist American Association of Textile chists & colorists American bee journal American behavioral scientist American ceramic society bulletin American dyestuff reporter American economic review American economist American Ethnologist American family physician American heart journal American history and Life American History review American Journal of Agricultural Economics American journal of anatomy American Journal of Archaeology American journal of botany American journal of botany American journal of cardiology American journal of chinese medicine American journal of clinical nutrition American journal of clinical pathology American journal of critical care American journal of dermatopathology American journal of diseases of children American journal of economics and sociology American journal of education American journal of epidemiology American journal of gastroenterology American journal of hematology American journal of hospice and palliative medicine (ajhpm) American journal of human biology American journal of human genetics American journal of international law American journal of islamic social sciences American journal of kidney diseases American journal of managed care American journal of mathematics American journal of medical technology American journal of medicine American journal of neuroradiology American journal of nursing American journal of obstetrics and gynecology American journal of ophthalmology American journal of orthopsychiatry American journal of otolaryngology American journal of otology American journal of pathology American journal of pharmacology American journal of pharmacy American Journal of Physical Anthropolgy American journal of physics American journal of physiology American journal of potato research American journal of primatology American journal of psychiatry American journal of psychology American journal of public health American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine American journal of rhinology American journal of roentgenology American journal of roentgenology and radium therapy American journal of sociology American journal of surgery American journal of surgical pathology American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene American journal of veterinary research American machinist American machinist and automated manufacturing American mathematical monthly American mineralogist American naturalist American oil chemists society journal American physical society bulletin American Quarterly American scientist American society for testing and materials American Society of Agriculture Engineering Transaction American sociological review American statistician American zoologist Amli science (urdu) Anaesthesia Anaesthesia and analgesia Anaesthesia and intensive care Anaesthesia, Pain and Intensive Care Anaesthesiology clinics of north america Anales del instituto barraquer Analyst Analytica chemica acta Analytical abstracts Analytical biochemistry Analytical chemistry (formerly: industrial and engineering chemistry analytical edition) Analytical letters Analytical proceedings Analytical Science and Technology Analyzer Anatomia clinica Anatomy and embryology Anesthesia and analygesia Angewandte chemie Animal behaviour Animal breeding abstracts Animal reproduction science Animal research and development Annales academe scientiarum fennicae a: physica Annales de geographie Annales de geophysique Annales de physique Annals of Abbasi Shaheed Hospital and karachi medical & dental college Annals of arid zone Annals of association of american geographers Annals of bangladesh agriculture Annals of botany Annals of clinical biochemistry Annals of community oriented education Annals of emergency medicine Annals of human genetics Annals of internal medicine Annals of King Edward Medical University Annals of Library and Information Studies Annals of library science and documentation Annals of medicine (formerly: annales of clinical research) Annals of neurology Annals of nuclear energy (formerly: journal of nuclear energy) Annals of otology rhinology laryngology Annals of Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences Annals of physics Annals of rheumatic diseases Annals of royal college of surgeons of england Annals of saudi medicine Annals of statistics (formerly: annals of mathematical statistics) Annals of surgery Annals of the icrp Annals of the royal college of physicians and surgeons Annals of the royal college of surgeons of edinburgh Annals of thoracic surgery Annals of Thoracid Medicine Annals of tropical medicine and parasitology Annals of tropical paediatrics Annual geomagnetic bulletin Annual report Annual reports Annual review of biochemistry Annual review of entomology Annual review of plant physiology and plant moleculer biology anti Cancer Agent in Medicinal Chemistry Anti Infective Agents in Medicinal Chemistry Anti Inflammatory & Anti Allergy Agents In Medicinal Chemistry Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy Antiquity Aorn journal Apo news Apparel Applied and environmental microbiology (formerly: applied microbiology) Applied biochemistry and microbiology Applied Computing Review Applied ecology abstracts Applied economics Applied health physics abstracts and notes Applied laser technology Applied linguistics Applied mathematical modelling Applied mathematics and mechanics Applied mechanics reviews Applied Microbiology Applied numerical mathematics Applied nursing research Applied optics Applied physics Applied physics b: lasers & optics Applied physics b: photo physics and laser chemistry Applied physics letters Applied plastics and reinforced plastics review Applied radiation and isotopes (formerly: international journal of applied radiation and isotopes) Applied radiology Applied science and technology Applied scientific research Applied signal processing Applied solar energy Applied spectroscopy Applied surface science Appropriate technology Aps news: american physical society news Aquaculture Aquaculture news Arab gulf journal of scientific research Arabian journal for science and engineering Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering (Section A: Sciences) Aramco world magazine Archaeology Archaeometry Archeng: a journal of architects and engineers Archi times: world news of architectures Architect Architectural design Architectural digest: (the international magazine of interior design and architecture) Architectural periodicals index Architectural record Architectural review Architecture Architecture + design Architecture plus Architecture plus interiors Archive of pathology and medicine Archives de neurobiologia Archives in Pharmacal Research Archives of biochemistry and biophysics Archives of dermatology and syphilology Archives of diseases in childhood Archives of endrology Archives of environmental health Archives of family medicine Archives of general psychiatry Archives of internal medicine Archives of Iranian Medicine Archives of mechanics Archives of medical research Archives of microbiology Archives of neurology Archives of ophthalmology Archives of otolaryngology Archives of otolaryngology head and neck surgery Archives of pathology and laboratory medicine Archives of pediatrics and adolescent medicine Archives of surgery Archivio Trentino Di Storia Contemporanea Armada international Armour news bulletin Arms control today Art and antiques Artha vijnana Arthritis and rheumatism Arthritis Care & Research Arthroscopy Artificial intelligence Arts and humanities in higher education Asae agricultural engineering ASBMB Today Asce journal of engineering mechanics Asce journal of hydraulic engineering Asce proceedings journal of water resources planning and management Asce: journal of architectural engineering Asce: journal of structural engineering Ashrae journal Asia Oceania Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Asia pacific development journal Asia pacific environment Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition Asia pacific perspectives: japan Asia pacific population journal Asia pacific technology digest Asia week Asian Affairs Asian agribusiness Asian agriculture Asian australian journal of animal sciences Asian computer monthly Asian development review Asian economic journal Asian economic review Asian Journal of Agriculture and Development Asian Journal of chemistry Asian Journal of Plant Sciences Asian medical journal Asian medical news (hong kong) Asian medical news karachi Asian pacific population programme news Asian perspectives Asian recorder Asian seed planting material Asian sources computer products Asian sources electronics Asian survey Asian textile business asian textile Business International Asia-pacific journal of chemical engineering Aslib information Aslib proceedings Assesment in education Assignment children (unicef) Association of medical doctors for asia Astm standardization news Astronautica acta Astronautics and aeronautics Astronautics and aerospace engineering Astronomical journal Astrophysical journal Astrophysical letters and communications (formerly: astrophysical letters) Astrophysical physics Atlantic Atmospheric environment Atom Atomes Atomic data and nuclear data tables (formerly: nuclear data tables) Atomic energy in australia (formerly: atomic energy) Atomic energy review Atomic spectroscopy (formerly: atomic absorption newsletter) Atomkernenergie /kerntechnik (formerly: kerntechnik atompraxis) Atomwirtschaft atom technik Atoomenergie enharr toepassingen Aurora Aussen politick - german foreign affairs review Australia Australian and new zealand journal of obstetrics and gynaecology Australian chemical engineering Australian Computer Journal Australian economic papers Australian Geographical Studies Australian Historical Studies Australian journal of agricultural research Australian journal of biological sciences Australian journal of botany Australian journal of chemistry Australian journal of experimental agriculture Australian journal of marine and freshwater research Australian journal of pharmacy Australian journal of physics Australian Journal of Public Administration Australian journal of soil research Australian journal of zoology Australian mining Australian science and technology newsletter Auto industry Autodesk news Automark Automatica Automation and remote control Automotive design and production Automotive engineer Automotive engineering international Automotive intustries Automotive testing technology international Avian diseases Aviation space and environmental medicine Aviation week and space technology Awhonn lifelines Babel Bacteriological reviews Bahrain medical bulletin Bahria Journal of Professional Psychology Baif journal (bharatiya agro industries foundation) Balance of payments statistics Balochistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences Bangladesh development studies Bangladesh journal of agricultural economics Bangladesh journal of public administration Bangladesh medical research council bulletin Bangladesh science and technology index Baqai News Basin Research Bbc nachrichten Bedford shire businessman Behavioral and brain science Behavioral biology Behavioural and Neural Biology Beijing review Bell laboratory technical journal (formerly: atandt bell laboratory technical journal) Bell system technical journal Berichteder bunsen gessellschaft fur physikalish chemie Better crops Better crops with plant food BHUMI: planning research journal Biannual Journal of Gender and Social Issues Bible Review Bible Unde kirchie Bibliography of agriculture Bibliography of reproduction Bibliography of seismology Bibliotheca Sacra Bio deterioration research titles Biochemica et biophysica acta Biochemical and biophysical research communications Biochemical genetics Biochemical journal Biochemical medicine Biochemical Society Transactions Biochemist Biochemistry Biochemistry and cell biology Biochimica et biophysica acta : biophysics including photosynthesis Biochimica et biophysica acta: b bioenergetics Biochimica et biophysica acta: n nucleic acids and protein synthesis Biochimica et biophysica acta: protein structure Biocycle Biocycle: journal of composting & recycling Bioelectrochemistry and bioenergetics: a section of electroanalytical chemistry and interfacial electrochemistry Bioessays Biofuels, bioproducts and biorefining (biofpr) Biogeochemistry Biologia Biological abstracts Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin Biological bulletin Biological chemistry:hoppe-Seylers Biological conservation Biological control Biological Research Journal Biological reviews Biologist Biology fertility of soils Biology of blood and marrow transplantation (bb & mt) Biology of reproduction Biomedica Biometrica Biometrics Biomolecular engineering Bioorganic and medicinal Chemistry Letters Bioorganic Chemistry Biophysical journal Biophysics Biopolymers Bioresearch index Bioresource technology Bioscience Bioscience reports Bioscience, biotechnology & biochemistry Biota Biotechnic and histochemistry Biotechniques Biotechnology biotechnology and Applied biochemistry Biotechnology and bioengineering Bitki koruma bulteni (plant protection bulletin) Blast furnace and steel plant Blood Blood journal of haematology Bogoslovni Vestnik Bold Boletim de la sociedad botanica Bollettino di zoologia Bone marrow transplantation Book review digest Books and bookman Borec Borneo review Botanical bulletin of Academia Sinica/Academia Sinica Botanical Bulletin Botanical gazette Botanical review Botswana Journal of Technology Brain Brain research bulletin Brain Research Reviews Bratislavske lekarske listy bratislava medical journal Breast British ceramic abstracts British ceramic society transactions British columbia medical journal British corrosion journal British dental journal British educational research journal British heart journal British homoeopathic journal British journal of anaesthesia British journal of cancer British journal of chiropody British journal of clinical pathology British journal of clinical practice British journal of clinical psychology British journal of clinical psychology (formerly: british journal of social and clinical psychology) British journal of dermatology British journal of diseases of the chest British journal of educational psychology British journal of experimental pathology British journal of family planning British journal of guidence and councelling British journal of haematology British journal of health psychology British journal of hospital medicine British journal of neurosurgery British journal of non destructive testing British journal of nursing British journal of nutrition British journal of obstetrics and gynaecology British journal of ophthalmology British journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery British journal of pharmacology (formerly: british journal of pharmacology and chemotherapy) British journal of photography British journal of plastic surgery British journal of psychiatry British journal of psychology British journal of radiology British journal of rheumatology British journal of sexual medicines British journal of sociology British journal of surgery British journal of urology British journal of venereal diseases British medical bulletin British medical journal British medical journal of radiology British medicine (formerly: british medical book list) British polymer journal British printer British technology index Brown boveri review Bucking hamshire business Buffalo bulletin Building and Interior Building science abstracts Bulgarian journal of physics Bulletin Bulletin cancer Bulletin chiang mai association medical sciences Bulletin college of physicians and surgeons pakistan bulletin Et Memories De Academie Royale De Medicine De Belgique Bulletin for the international fiscal documentation Bulletin of abstracts Bulletin of american college of chest physicians Bulletin of american physical society (series ii) Bulletin of american physical society series i Bulletin of atomic scientists Bulletin of biological research centre Bulletin of botanical survey of india Bulletin of centre of excellence in geology Bulletin of Education and Research Bulletin of entomological research Bulletin of experimental biology and medicine Bulletin of health studies Bulletin of hydrobiological research Bulletin of hygiene Bulletin of indian society of earthquake technology Bulletin of institute of statistical research and training Bulletin of irrigation drainage and flood control research council of pakistan Bulletin of materials science Bulletin of mathematical biology formerly bulletin of mathematical biophysics Bulletin of medical library association Bulletin of oil and natural gas commission Bulletin of royal of society international scientific information services Bulletin of the academy of science ussr Bulletin of the american mathematical society Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists Bulletin of the Chemical Society of Ethopia Bulletin of the chemical society of japan Bulletin of the institute of physics and the physical society Bulletin of the russian academy of sciences: physics Bulletin of the seismological society of america Bulletin of the unesco regional office for education in asia and pacific Bulletin of the veterinary institute in pulawy Bulletin of the world health organisation Bulletin of Tibetology Bulletin of world health organization Bulletin of zoology Bulletin on narcotics Bulletin scientifique Burns including thermal injury Business automation Business review Business times Byte C and ca library translation C/c++ users journal Cad desk (the independent guide to auto cad systems and software) Cad user Cadalyst Cajanus Calcutta medical journal California agriculture Cambridge journal of economics Canadian critical care nursing journal Canadian family physician Canadian geographer Canadian geotechnical journal Canadian journal of agricultural economics Canadian journal of biochemistry and cell biology Canadian journal of botany Canadian journal of chemical engineering Canadian journal of chemistry Canadian journal of civil engineering Canadian journal of diagnosis Canadian journal of earth sciences Canadian journal of economics Canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences Canadian journal of forest research Canadian Journal of Genetics and Cytology Canadian journal of mathematics Canadian journal of medical radiation technology Canadian journal of microbiology Canadian journal of nursing research Canadian journal of physics Canadian journal of physiology and pharmacology Canadian journal of plant science Canadian journal of psychiatric nursing Canadian journal of public health Canadian journal of remote sensing Canadian journal of research Canadian journal of surgery Canadian journal of zoology Canadian medical association journal Canadian medical association journal (cmaj) Canadian metallurgical Canadian nuclear technology Canadian nurse Cancer Cancer and metastasis reviews Cancer biochemistry biophysics Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology Cancer cytopathology Cancer forum Cancer genetics and cytogenetics Cancer journal for clinicians Cancer nursing Cancer research Cancer therapy abstracts Cancer treatment report Cancer treatment reviews Candollea Capri documentation Carbonates and Evaporites Cardiology Cardiology clinics Cardiovascular and Hematological Agents in Medicinal Chemistry Cardiovascular and Hematological Disorders Drug Targets Cardiovascular clinics Cardiovascular research Carvan-e-science Casting plant and technology Catholic Worker Cdb news (caribbean development bank) Cell Cell and tissue research Cell Death and Differeniation Cellulose chemistry and technology Centerpoint Central african journal of medicine Central asiatic journal Central Nervous Agents in Medicinal Chemistry Centre for overseas pest research Ceramic abstracts Ceramic engineering and science proceedings Ceramics international Cereal chemistry Cereal Food World Cereal research communications Ceres Cern courier Ceylon journal of science Cfd news (computational fluid dynamics) Challenge Chang gung medical journal Chartered mechanical engineer Chartered surveyor Cheer ChemBioChem Chemica scripta Chemical abstracts Chemical abstracts: applied chemistry and chemical engineering section Chemical abstracts: biochemistry section Chemical abstracts: organic chemistry section Chemical abstracts: physical and analytical chemistry section Chemical and engineering news Chemical and petrochemical news Chemical and pharmaceutical bulletin Chemical and process engineer Chemical Biology and Drug Design Chemical communications Chemical engineering Chemical engineering and technology Chemical engineering progress Chemical engineering science Chemical geology Chemical horizons Chemical innovation (formerly: chemtech) Chemical instrumentation Chemical news Chemical physics Chemical physics letters Chemical processing Chemical reviews Chemical society annual report on the progress of chemistry Chemical society annual reviews Chemical society reviews Chemical titles Chemical week Chemie in unserer zeit Chemische berichte Chemist Chemist and druggist Chemistry Chemistry and Biodiversity Chemistry and industry Chemistry in britain Chemistry in canada Chemistry International Chemistry international: the new magazine of the iupac Chemistry letters Chemistry of materials Chemistry of natural compounds Chemistry World Chemistry: A European Journal Chemists review Chemtech: the innovator's magazine Chest Child development Children hospital complex multan Child's nervous system Chilton's iandcs (formerly: instruments and control systems) Chimia China medical abstracts China pictorial China reconstructs China science and technology abstracts China science and technology newsletters China's medicine Chinese economic studies Chinese journal of nuclear physics Chinese journal of nuclear science and engineering Chinese medical journal Chinese physics Choice Choices, human development magazine (undp) Christian medical college vellore alumni journal Chromatographia Chromatography Chromatography Abstracts Chulalongkorn medical journal CIBA REVIEWS Ciencia interamericana Cim bulletin (canadian mining and metallurgical bulletin) Circuit world Circuits assembly: the magazine for surface-mount and board-level assembly Circuits manufacturing Circulation Circulation research Cisti news Civil engineering Civil engineering and public works reviews Civil engineering consulting engineer Cleveland clinic journal of medicine Clinical and experimental allergy Clinical biochemistry Clinical cancer research Clinical chemistry Clinical chemistry & laboratory medicine Clinical endocrinology Clinical Genetics Clinical immunology and immunopathology Clinical infectious diseases Clinical Lab Clinical microbiology review Clinical nephrology Clinical Neuropharmacology Clinical neurophysiology Clinical notes on respiratory diseases Clinical pediatrics Clinical pharmacokinetics Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics Clinical physics and physiological measurement Clinical psychologist Clinical radiology: journal of royal college of radiologist Clinical research Clinical rheumatology Clinical science Clinical signs in ophthalmology Clinical symposia Clinical trails journal Clinics in chest medicine Clinics in endocrinology and metabolism Clinics in geriatric medicine Clinics in haematology Clinics in perinatology Clinics in plastic surgery Clinics in sports medicine Clothing and Textile Research Journal Collection of czechoslovak chemical communications College and research libraries Colloid and polymer science Colloid journal of the ussr Colloids and surfaces Colombo plan staff college for technician education newsletter Color engineering Colorado school mines Coloration technology (formerly: journal of the society of dyers and colourists) Colourage Columbia Journal of World Business Com siemens magazine of computers and communication Combinatoral Chemistry and High Throghput Screening Combustion Combustion and flame Combustion explosion and shock waves Combustion science & technology Commerce and economic review Commercial news Commercial news bulletin Commercial space report Communications in mathematical physics Communications of the acm Communications of the association for computing machinery Community development journal Community medicine Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology B Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology C Comparative biochemistry and physiology: a comparative physiology Comparative studies Competitor: Current World Affairs Components in electronics Composites Compressed air Computational intelligence Computational mechanics Computech Computer Computer abstracts Computer aided engineering journal Computer aided geometric design Computer and automation Computer and control abstracts Computer bulletin Computer communications Computer design Computer graphics forum Computer journal Computer language Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering Computer modeling and simulation in engineering Computer network Computer news Computer physics communications Computer physics reports Computer product news Computer review Computer user Computer user magazine Computer weekly Computer world Computer world international Computers and biomedical research Computers and chemistry: an international journal Computers and concrete: an international journal Computers and electrical engineering Computers and electronics (formerly: popular electronics) Computers and fluids Computers and geosciences: an international journal Computers and graphics Computers and mathematics with applications Computers and operational research Computers and structures Computers in mechanical engineering Computers in physics Computing Computing and control engineering journal Computing in science & engineering Computing journal abstracts Computing reviews Computing systems in engineering: an international journal Comstech news Comstech technology window Concept Concise international chemical assessment document Concrete Concrete and constructional engineering Concrete international design and construction Concrete international: magazine of the american concrete institute Congressional quarterly almanac Connect Connections Connector specifier Conserva Conservation biology Construction management and economics Consultant Contemporary physics Contemporary obstetrics/gynaecology Contemporary physics Contemporary sociology Contemporary southeast asia Contents of current journals Contraception Contribution to Indian Socialogy Control Control and instrumentation Control de publicidad y ventas Control engineering Control systems Cooperation south Coordination chemistry reviews Copper Cord (The) Corrosion Corrosion abstracts Corrosion science protection technology Cospar information bulletin Cotistics Cotton growing review Cotton review Cotton review of world situation Crerar metals abstracts Cri abstracts Cricketer Criterion Critical care clinics Critical care medicine Critical care nurse Critical care nursing clinics of north america Critical reviews in biochemistry & molecular biology Croatian medical journal Crop protection courier Crop sciences Crops and soil magazine Crops area production Crustaceana Cryogenics Csa neurosciences abstracts Csiro industrial research news Culture medicine and psychiatry Cultures Current abstracts of chemistry and index chemicus Current Aging Science Current agro technology Current Alzheimer research Current Analytical Chemistry Current anthropology Current Bioactive Compounds Current Biology Current cancer Drug Targets Current Cancer Therapy Reviews Current Chemical Biology Current chemical reactions Current Clinical Pharmacvology Current contents Current contents: agriculture, biology and environmental sciences Current contents: biological sciences Current contents: clinical medicine Current contents: clinical practice Current contents: engineering technology and applied sciences Current contents: life sciences Current contents: social and behavioral sciences Current Drug Delivery Current Drug Discovery Technologies Current Drug Metabolism Current Drug Safety Current Drug Targets Current Drug Targets: Infection Disorders Current Drug Targets: Inflammation & Allergy Current Gene Therapy Current Genomics Current geographical publications Current history Current HIV Research Current Hypertension Reviews Current list of medical literature Current literature on science of science Current mathematical publications (formerly: contents of contemporary mathematical journal) Current Medical Imaging Reviews Current medical research and opinion current Medicinal Chemistry Current microbiology Current Molecular Medicine Current Nano Science Current Neuropharmacology Current notes on international affairs Current Nutrition and Food Sciences Current Opinion in Biotechnology current opinion in cardiology Current opinion in cell biology Current opinion in infectious diseases Current opinion in nephrology and hypertension Current opinion in obstetrics and gynecology Current opinion in psychiatry Current Opinion in Structural Biology Current organic chemistry Current orthopaedics Current paediatrics current Pediatric Reviews Current Pharmaceutical Analysis Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology Current Pharmaceutical Design Current Pharmacogenomics Current Pharmacogenomics and Personalized Medicine Current problems in surgery Current Protein & Peptide Science current Psychiatry Reviews Current Radiopharmaceuticals Current Respiratory Medicine Reviews Current Rheumatology Reviews Current science Current sociology Current Stem Cell Research & Therapy Current technology index Current titles in turkish science: scientific publications ser b Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry Current Women Health Reviews Cutting edge Cybernetics Cytogenetics and cell genetics Cytologia Cytometry Cytometry (part a) Dairy science abstracts Dairyman Danish medical bulletin: journal of health sciences Data base advisor Data systems Datalog Datamation Decade watch Defence Defence electronics (formerly: electronic warefare) Defence journal Demography Demography india Dental abstracts Dental news Dental update Desalination Desertification control bulletin Design engineering Design news Desktop engineering Deutschland Deutschland forum on politics, culture, business and science Deutschland: magazine of politics, culture, business and science Developing economies Development Development and change Development and cooperation Development digest Development forum Development international Development times Developmental biology Developmental Brain Research Developmental Disabilities Bulletin Developmental dynamics Developmental medicine and child neurology Diabetes Diabetes care Diabetes digest Diabetes educator Diabetes International Diabetes literature index Diabetologia Diagnostic cytopathology Dialogue Diesel and gas turbine worldwide Diesel equipment superintendent Digestive diseases and sciences Discourse Processes: A Multidisciplinary Journal Discover: the magazine of science Discovery Diseases of the colon and rectum Dissertation abstracts international a humanities and social sciences Doctoral dissertations on asia Dog world Doga turkish journal of biology Doga turkish journal of botany Doga turkish journal of chemistry Doga turkish journal of engineering and environmental sciences Doga turkish journal of mathematics Doga turkish journal of physics and astrophysics Doga turkish journal of zoology Doklady botanical sciences Doklady chemistry Doklady physical chemistry Dr dobb's journal Dr dobb's journal of software tools for professional programmer Drive and control Drug bulletin Drug Metabolism Letters Drug therapy Drugs Drugs and Pharmaceuticals: current R&D highlights Drugs and Pharmaceuticals: Industry highlights Drugs dependence Drugs made in germany E and P: a hart energy publication E. scientific instruments Ear nose and throat journal Early human development Earth and planetary science letters Earth science reviews Earthquake prediction research Earthquakes engineering and structural dynamics East african medical journal East and west 1951 East asian review Eastern mediterranean health journal Eastern mediterranean region drugs digest Eastern mediterranean region epidemiology bulletin E-business advisor Ecology Econometric theory Econometrica Economia internazionale Economic affairs Economic and financial review Economic Bulletin Economic development and cultural change Economic development quarterly Economic digest Economic forecasts Economic geography Economic geology Economic inquiry (formerly: western economic journal) Economic journal Economic modelling Economic outlook Economic quarterly Economic record Economic review Economic systems research Economica Economics Economics of education review Economics: journal of the economic association Economist Ecotoxicology and environmental safety Edis Edn (electronic design news) Education Education and training Education equipment Education for health Education in asia and pacific Education in chemistry Educational and psychological measurement Educational innovation and information Educational leadership Educational studies in mathematics EE times Egyptian journal of agricultural research Egyptian journal of desert research Ekistics Electrical and electronics abstracts Electrical communication Electrical contractor Electrical engineer Electrical engineering Electrical power engineers Electrical products Electrical review Electrical world Electro medica Electro optics Electrochemica acta Electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology Electronic and radio engineer Electronic applications components and materials Electronic business Electronic components Electronic components and applications Electronic design Electronic engineering Electronic letters Electronic packaging and production Electronic product news Electronic production Electronic technology Electronics & beyond Electronics (formerly: electronics weekly) Electronics and communication engineering journal Electronics digest Electronics information and planning Electronics international Electronics products Electrophoresis Electrotechnology Elektor electronics Elmac journal ELS Digest of environmental impact statements Elt journal Emancipation Embo journal (european molecular biology organization) EMBO Report Emergency medicine Emergency medicine clinics of north america Emerging infectious diseases Emirates Journal of Food & Agriculture Emirates medical journal Emperical economics Endeavour Endocrine practice Endocrine reviews Endocrinology Endocrinology and metabolism clinics of north america Endoscopy Energy Energy & automation Energy and fuels Energy conversion and management Energy Economics Energy news Energy research abstracts Energy update Engineering Engineering & automation Engineering analysis Engineering analysis with boundary elements Engineering and architecture Engineering and technology Engineering computers Engineering cybernetics Engineering design Engineering distributors Engineering economist Engineering fracture mechanics Engineering geology Engineering horizons Engineering in medicine Engineering index annual Engineering journal Engineering management journal Engineering materials and design Engineering news Engineering news records Engineering review Engineering today Engineering with computers: international journal for computer aided mechanical and structural engineering English teaching forum Enr (engineering news record) Entomological review Entomology abstracts Environ Monitor Environment and development economics Environment and planning a Environment and planning b Environment and planning: (C) Environment and planning: (D) Environment management abstracts Environmental biology of fishes Environmental Chemistry Environmental engineering world Environmental entomology Environmental health perspectives Environmental pollution Environmental review Environmental sanitation abstracts Environmental science and technology Environmental toxicology and pharmacology Eos: transaction - american geophysical union EPE: Everyday practical electronics Epidemiologic reviews Epidemiology Epidemiology and infection Epilepsia Episodes international geoscience news magazine Erdkunde Ergonomics Ergonomics in design ESCULAPIO Journal of services institute of medical sciences Essays in criticism Estanara Eukaryotic Cell Euphytica Euromicro journal European economic review European heart journal European journal of applied mathematics European journal of biochemistry European Journal of Cell Biology European journal of clinical nutrition European journal of development research European journal of endocrinology European Journal of Marketing European journal of nuclear medicine European journal of operational research European journal of pediatrics European journal of pharmacology European journal of soil science (formerly: journal of soil science) European polymer journal European respiratory journal European review of agricultural economics European urology Evaluation Everyday with practical electronics Evidence-based medicine Excerpta medica Excerpta medica cancer Excerpta medica gastroenterology Excerpta medica obstetrics and gynecology Experientia Experimental cell research Experimental eye research Experimental mechanics Experimental parasitology Expert systems with applications, an international journal Eye Eye: An international Bimonthly Journal of Ophthalmology Faisal shahid library bulletin Family doctor Family medicine Family physician Family planning perspectives international Fao monthly bulletin of agricultural economics and statistics Fao plant protection bulletin Fao quarterly bulletin of statistics Far eastern economic review Farm scientist Farming japan farming outlook Faseb journal Fashion Business International Fatigue and fracture of engineering materials and structures: the international journal Fauji Foundation Health Journal Febs letters Federal reserve bulletin Federation proceedings Feed management Fems microbiology reviews Fertility and sterility Fertilizer abstracts Fertilizer technology Fertilizer update Fiber systems Fibers & Polymers Fibre & Textiles in Eastern Europe Fibre science and technology Field crop abstracts Field crop research Fikr o nazar urdu Finance and development Financial Analysts Journal Financial World Finite elements in analysis and design Fire journal Fire safety journal First break (european association of exploration geophysicists) Fish physiology and biochemistry Fishery technology Fitoterapia Fizika a: a journal of experimental & theoretical physics Fizika B: A journal of experimental and theoretical physics Flight international Flora Culture International Fluid dynamics Fluid dynamics research, an international journal Focus on critical care Food & agriculture news magazine Food & nutrition Food and agricultural legislation Food and environment protection newsletter Food and nutrition bulletin Food irradiation Food policy Food Protection Trends Food research institute studies Food review Food science and technology abstracts Food technology Food technology in australia Foreign affairs Foreign affairs pakistan Foreign policy Foreign trade Forest science Forestry abstracts Fortnightly engineering review Fortune Forum Forum for modern language studies Forward Foundry management and technology Foundry trade journal Free Radical Biology Fresenius journal of analytical chemistry (formerly: fresenius zeitschrift fuer analytische chemie) Fresh water biology Friday times Friends perspective Frontier Journal of Agricultural Research Fruits Fuel and energy abstracts Fuel cell advocate, green power from hydrogen Fuji electric review Fujitsu scientific and technical journal Funtional Plant Biology Future generations computer systems FWU Journal of Social Sciences Gamma field symposia Gas abstracts Gas chromatographic literature Gastroenterology Gastroenterology clinics of north america Gastrointestinal endoscopy Gazzetta medica italiana-archivio per le scienze mediche Gec journal of research Gec review Gender and education Gender technology and development General and comparative endocrinology General information programme/unisys news letter General linguistics General relativity and gravitations Generator Genes and Development Genetica: an International Journal of Genetics Genetical research Genetics Genetics abstracts Genetics in Medicine Genetics Psychology Monographs Genitourinary medicine Genome Research Genomics: international journal for analyses of the human and other genomes Genus Geo abstracts Geochimica Geochimica et cosmochimica acta Geoexploration Geofisica Geographical journal Geographical magazine Geographical review Geography Geologica (research bulletin of geoscience laboratory geological survey of pakistan,islamabad) Geological bulletin (university of peshawar) Geological Bulletin of the Punjab University Geological magazine Geological review Geological society of america bulletin Geology Geomagnetism and aeronomy Geonews Geophysical abstracts Geophysical prospecting Geophysical research bullitin Geophysics Geotechnique Geriatric medicine Glasgow mathematical journal Glass and ceramics Glass international Glass technology Glaucoma Glimpses from fresh arrivals in sid Global aids news Globle digest Gomal Journal of Medical Sciences Gomal University Journal of Research Government college economic journal Gps world Green Chemistry Grey room Grid Ground water Groundwater age Guru nanak journal of sociology Gut: an international journal of gastroenterology and hematology Gynaecolgy and Obstetrics Gynaecologic oncology Gynaecologist Gynaecology forum Habitat england Hamdard Hamdard islamicus Hamdard Medicus Hands clinics Harmony: Journal of Education and Humanities Harvard business review Harvard Business Review Harvard educational review haryana journal of horticultural science Hawaii medical journal Head & neck (formerly: head & neck surgery) Head & neck surgery Health alert Health and population perspectives and issues Health and social service journal Health education journal Health for the millions Health policy Health policy and planning Health rays digest Health services journal Health services journal eastern mediterranean region Health services research Health transition review Health world medical journal (formerly: health world) Heart (formerly: british heart journal) Heart and lung Heating and ventilating engineer Heating- piping - air conditioning Helminthological abstracts Helminthological abstracts series a and b Helvetica chemica acta Helvetica physica acta Hematological oncology clinics of north america Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell Therapy Hepatology Herald Hereditas Heredity Hertford shire businessman Heterocycles Heterocycles Hewlett packard journal High energy physics index High lights High speed diesel report High technology High temperature science Higher education news Higher education review pakistan Highlights of ophthalmology Highway research abstracts Hilal (urdu) Histopathology History of political economy History today Hitachi review Hitotsubashi journal of economics Hmj (himont medical journal) Home Textile Today Honeywell computer journal Horticultural abstracts Horticulture, environment and biotechnology Hortscience Hospital and community psychiatry Hospital and health services administration Hospital medicine Hospital physician Hospital practice Hospital update HPAC Engineering (Heating/Piping/Air Conditioning) Human ecology Human factor Human heredity Human molecular genetics Human pathology Human physiology Human resource development Hungarian r and d abstracts Hungarian technical abstracts Huntington Library Quarterly Hvac and r research Hydraulics and air engineering Hydraulics and pneumatics Hydrocarbon asia Hydrocarbon processing Hydrology review Hypertension I and ec fundamentals Iaea bulletin Iaslic bulletin Iassi quarterly Ibm journal of research and development Ibm systems journal Ibm technical disclosure bulletin ICAC Recorder Icarda carvan Ice abstracts Ice: proceedings of the institution of civil engineer Ice: proceedings of the institution of civil engineer, Structures and buildings Ice: proceedings of the institution of civil engineer: management procurement and law Ice: proceedings of the institution of civil engineer: muncipal engineer Ice: proceedings of the institution of civil engineer: transport Icimod newsletter Icp information newsletter Idrc reports Ids bulletin Ie: Industrial engineer Iee news Iee proceedings (part b: electric power applications) Iee proceedings (part c: generation transmission and distribution) Iee Proceedings: circuts, devices and systems Iee review (formerly: electronics and power engineers) Ieee aerospace and electronic systems magazine Ieee antennas and propagation magazine IEEE ASME Transaction on Mechatronics Ieee circuits and devices magazine Ieee circuits and systems magazine Ieee communications letters Ieee communications magazine IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine Ieee computational science and engineering Ieee computer Ieee computer applications in power magazine Ieee computer graphics and applications Ieee computers IEEE Computing in Science & Engineering Ieee control systems magazine Ieee design and test of computers Ieee electron device letters IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Ieee expert intelligent systems and their applications Ieee industry applications magazine Ieee intelligent systems Ieee internet computing IEEE IT Professional IEEE Journal of Light Wave Technology Ieee journal of lightwave technology Ieee journal of quantum electronics Ieee journal of selected areas in communications Ieee journal of selected topics in quantum electronics Ieee journal of solid state circuits Ieee micro IEEE Microwave Magazine Ieee multimedia IEEE Networking Magazine IEEE Oceanic Engineering IEEE Pervasive IEEE Pervasive Computing Mobile IEEE Power and Energy Ieee power engineering review IEEE Selected Areas in Communications IEEE Sensors Journal Ieee signal processing letters IEEE Signal Processing Magazine Ieee software Ieee spectrum IEEE Technology & Society Ieee transaction on mobile computing Ieee transaction on wireless communication Ieee transactions on acoustics, speech and signal processing: from 1991 ieee transactions on signal processing Ieee transactions on aerospace and electronic systems Ieee transactions on applied superconductivity Ieee transactions on automatic control Ieee transactions on biomedical engineering Ieee transactions on broadcasting Ieee transactions on circuits and systems Ieee transactions on circuits and systems fundamental theory and applications ieee transactions on circuits and systems-II Ieee transactions on communication technology Ieee transactions on communications (formerly: ieee transactions on communication technology) Ieee transactions on communications magazine Ieee transactions on components and packaging technologies Ieee transactions on components, hybrids and manufacturing technology Ieee transactions on computer-aided design of integrated circuits and systems Ieee transactions on computers Ieee transactions on consumer electronics (formerly: ieee transactions on broadcast and television receivers) Ieee transactions on control systems technology Ieee transactions on dielectrics and electrical insulations Ieee transactions on education Ieee transactions on electrical insulation Ieee transactions on electro devices Ieee transactions on electromagnetic compatibility Ieee transactions on electron devices Ieee transactions on electronics ieee transactions on electronics packaging manufacturing Ieee transactions on energy conversion Ieee transactions on engineering management Ieee transactions on evolutionary computation Ieee transactions on fuzzy systems Ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing Ieee transactions on image processing Ieee transactions on industrial electronics Ieee transactions on information theory Ieee transactions on instrumentation and measurement Ieee transactions on knowledge and data engineering Ieee transactions on magnetics Ieee transactions on medical imaging Ieee transactions on microwave theory and techniques Ieee transactions on multimedia ieee transactions on nanotechnology Ieee transactions on networking Ieee transactions on neural networks Ieee transactions on nuclear science Ieee transactions on parallel and distributed system Ieee transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence IEEE Transactions on Photonics technology Letters Ieee transactions on plasma science Ieee transactions on power apparatus and systems Ieee transactions on power electronics Ieee transactions on power systems Ieee transactions on professional communications Ieee transactions on reliability Ieee transactions on robotics and automation Ieee transactions on semiconductor manufacturing Ieee transactions on signal processing (formerly: ieee transactions acoustics, speech and signal processing) IEEE Transactions on Software Ieee transactions on software engineering Ieee transactions on speech and audio processing Ieee transactions on systems man and cybernetics Ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics and frequency control (formerly: ieee transactions on sonics and ultrasonics) Ieee transactions on vehicular technology Ieee transactions on very large scale integration (vlsi) systems Ieee transactions on visualization and computer graphics IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications Ieee/acm transactions on networking Ifda dossier Illinois libraries Ima journal of numerical analysis Image and vision computing Imana newsletter Immuno chemistry Immunology Immunology & allergy practice Immunology and allergy clinics of north america Immunology,Endocrine & Metabolic Agents Impact Impact international Impact of science on society In focus In vitro: Journal of the tissue Culture association Index medicus Index medicus eastern mediterranean region Index veterinarius India international centre quarterly India news India quarterly Indian bee journal Indian chemical society journal Indian concrete journal Indian defence review Indian economic journal Indian economic review Indian farming Indian forester Indian heart journal Indian journal of agricultural economics Indian journal of agricultural research Indian journal of agricultural sciences Indian journal of agronomy Indian journal of animal research Indian journal of animal sciences Indian journal of applied chemistry Indian Journal of Biochemistry Indian journal of biochemistry and biophysics Indian Journal of Biotechnology Indian journal of chemical technology Indian journal of chemistry Indian journal of chemistry section b Indian journal of chest diseases and allied science Indian journal of dairy science Indian journal of earth sciences Indian journal of ecology Indian journal of economics Indian journal of engineering and material sciences Indian journal of entomology Indian journal of experimental biology Indian journal of fiber and textile research Indian journal of fisheries Indian journal of forestry Indian journal of gender studies Indian journal of genetics and plant breeding Indian Journal of Geo-Marine Sciences Indian journal of gerontology Indian journal of helminthology Indian journal of horticulture Indian journal of leprosy Indian journal of marine sciences Indian journal of mathematics Indian journal of medical research Indian journal of medical sciences Indian Journal of Natural Products and Resources Indian journal of nematology Indian journal of nutrition and dietetics Indian journal of ophthalmology Indian journal of pathology and bacteriology Indian journal of pathology and microbiology Indian journal of pediatrics Indian journal of pharmacology Indian journal of plant physiology Indian journal of poultry science Indian journal of power and river valley development Indian journal of psychiatry Indian Journal of Public Administration Indian journal of pure and applied mathematics Indian journal of pure and applied physics Indian journal of radio and space physics Indian journal of surgery Indian journal of technology Indian journal of textile research Indian Journal of Traditional Knowledge Indian leather Indian minerals Indian pediatrics Indian phytopathology Indian science abstracts Indian society of agricultural statistics journal Indian society of soil science journal Indian sugar Indian veterinary journal Indonesian agriculture research and development journal Indonesian journal of agricultural science Indus Indus Journal of Managememt and Social Sciences Indus Journal of Management & Social Sciences Indus: journal of pakistan wapda Industrial affairs Industrial and engineering chemistry (analytical edition) Industrial and engineering chemistry (process design and development) Industrial and engineering chemistry research Industrial and labour relations review Industrial and production engineering Industrial and scientific instruments Industrial Bulletin Industrial ceramics Industrial development Industrial development abstracts Industrial electronics communication automation instrumentation control Industrial engineering Industrial engineering journal Industrial handling and storage Industrial hygiene digest Industrial laser solutions for manufacturing (formerly: industrial laser review) Industrial maintenance Industrial metrology: the international journal of automated measurement and control Industrial quality control Industrial relations Industrial research Industrial specifications Industrial times Industry and environment Industry asia international Industry week (formerly: electronics) Infection and immunity Infection control and hospital epidemiology Infectious Diseases Journal Infectious Disorder DrugTargets Inflammation and Allergy DrugTargets Inform Information and control Information Management Information retrieval and library automation Information science abstracts Information scientists Information services in mechanical engineering (ismec) Information Society Information technology Journal Infoterra bulletin Infoworld Infrared physics Injury british journal of accident surgery Inorganic and nuclear chemistry letters Inorganic chemica acta Inorganic chemistry Inorganica chemica acta bioinorganic chemistry articles and letters Insect Fauna of Korea Insects and pest control newsletter Institute of civil engineers proceedings Institute of civil engineers, proceedings, geotechnical engineering Institution of mining and metallurgy abstracts Instrumentation technology Instruments and control systems Instruments and experimental techniques Instruments the magazine of measurement and control Integrated rural development review Intellectual property in asia and the pacific Intelligent enterprise Interdisciplinary science reviews Interfaces in computing Internal medicine International abstracts in operations research International aerospace abstracts International affairs International agricultural development International agriculture digest International and comparative law quarterly International atomic energy agency bulletin International chemical engineering International child health International currency review International defence review International development abstracts International Diabetes monitor International digest of health legislation International dyer International economic journal International economic review International environmental technology International family planning perspectives and digest International fiber journal International financial statistics International hepatology communication International journal for development technology International journal for numerical methods in engineering International journal for numerical methods in fluids International Journal for Parasitology International journal for rural development International journal of acoustics and vibration International Journal of Advertising International journal of agriculture & biotechnology International Journal of Agriculture and Applied Sciences International Journal of Agriculture and Biology International journal of andrology International journal of applied mechanics and engineering International journal of applied radiation and isotopes radiation application and instrumentation part-a International journal of artificial intelligence in education International Journal of Asian Social Sciences International Journal of Asian Studies International journal of automotive technology and management International Journal of Biology and Biotechnology International Journal of Biology Research International journal of biomedical computing International journal of cancer International journal of cardiology International journal of chemical kinetics International journal of colorectal disease International journal of computer vision International journal of computers and electrical engineering International journal of computers and fluids International journal of computers and mathematics with applications International journal of control International journal of damage mechanics International journal of dermatology International journal of development planning literature International journal of ecology and environmental science International Journal of Economic and Environmental Geology International journal of electrical engineering education International journal of electronics (theoretical and experimental) International journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism International journal of energy research International journal of engine research International journal of engineering International journal of engineering science International journal of epidemiology International Journal of Foundation of Computer Sciences International journal of heat and fluid flow International journal of human resource management International journal of hydrogen energy International journal of immunopharmacology International journal of impact engineering International journal of leprosy International journal of machine tools and manufacture: design research and application International journal of mass spectrometry and ion process International journal of mechanical sciences International journal of middle east studies International Journal of Mini and Microcomputers International journal of modelling and simulation International journal of non-linear mechanics International journal of nursing practice International journal of nursing studies International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders International journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery International Journal of Organic Evolution International journal of otology rhinology lanrynology International journal of palliative nursing (ijpn) International journal of parasitology International Journal of Pathology International journal of pavement engineering International journal of peptide and protein research International journal of pest management International Journal of Pharmacology International Journal of Phycology and Phytochemistry International journal of powder metallurgy and powder technology International journal of psychology International journal of quantum chemistry International journal of radiation: oncology- biology- physics International journal of refrigeration International journal of renewable energy International journal of simulation modelling International journal of software engineering and knowledge engineering International journal of solid state electronics International Journal of south Asian Study International journal of supercomputer applications International journal of surface science and engineering International journal of the Computer, The Internet and Management International journal of theoretical physics International journal of transport management International journal of tuberculosis and lung diseases International journal of tuberculosis and lung diseases International journal of vehicle design International Journal of Wireless Information Networks International laboratory International labour review International licensing International magazine for textile design, processing and testing International management International materials reviews (formerly: international metals review) International monetary fund staff papers International nursing index International nursing review International ophthalmology clinics International Research Journal of Arts and Humanities International Review of Administrative Sciences International rice research newsletter International rice research notes International social science journal International studies International surgery International textile bulletin International Textile Monitor International trade forum International union of crystallography Internet today Intersec Invention intelligence Invertebrate Fauna of Korea Investigational new drugs Investment and marketing Invitro Cellular and Development Biology IPRI factfile IPRI Journal: Islamabad Policy Research Institute Journal Iqbal review Iranian journal of fisheries science Iranian Journal of Immunology Iranian journal of medical sciences Iranian journal of science and technology Ircihe bulletin Irish journal of medical science (ijms) Iron making and steel making Irrico news Irrigation and drainage (asce) (on line) Irrigation and drainage (chinese language) Irrigation and drainage abstracts Irrigation and power (journal of central board of irrigation and power) Irrigation and power abstracts Isi bulletin Isij international (iron and steel institute of japan) Islam and christian muslim relation Islamabad Journal of Science Islamic culture Islamic economic studies Islamic education Islamic quarterly Islamic studies Islamic thought and scientific creativity Isoss bulletin: the journal of islamic society of statistical sciences Isotope and radiation research Isotopes and radiation technology Isra Medical Journal Issues in Science and Technology It professional: technology solutions for the enterprise Ite journal (institute of transportation engineers) Its textile leader: the magazine for international management Ittefaq health care journal ITU News Iwasri iimi Iwasri news J. com Jadeed science (urdu) Jadeed zarait (urdu) Jama Jama Janes defence weekly Janes missiles and rockets Janes navy international Japan agricultural research Japan echo JAPAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION JOURNAL Japan pesticide information Japanese Bulletin of Arts Therapy Japanese journal of botany Japanese journal of clinical oncology Japanese journal of experimental medicine Japanese journal of geology and geography Japanese journal of mathematics Japanese journal of ryodoraku medicine Japanese journal of the atomic energy society of japan Japanese journal of zoology Jarq japan agricultural research quarterly Jeol news electron optics instruments Jetp letters Jicst abstracts series agro industries Jicst abstracts series renewable energy Jikeikai medical journal Jircas international symposium series Jircas Journal of Scientific Paper Jircas newsletter JONA'S HEALTHCARE LAW, ETHICS AND REGULATION Jordan Journal of Chemistry journal Journal for Scientific Research Journal for the history of arabic science Journal Geographic Journal of automobile engineering , proceedings of the I mech E part-D Journal of abstract and reviews: economics Journal of acoustic emission Journal of Administration Overseas Journal of advanced nursing Journal of advertising research Journal of affective disorders Journal of agri & food research Journal of agricultural and food chemistry Journal of agricultural economic research Journal of agricultural economics Journal of agricultural engineering Journal of Agricultural Research Journal of Agriculture and Biological Sciences Journal of Agriculture and Social Sciences Journal of aircraft Journal of Allama Iqbal Medical College Journal of allergy and clinical immunology Journal of alloys and compounds (formerly: journal of the less common metals) Journal of american academy of dermatology Journal of american chemical society Journal of american college of cardiology Journal of american health information management Journal Of American Society for Mass Spectrometry Journal of american society of nephrology Journal of american water works association Journal of anaesthesia and critical care Journal of analytical and environmental chemistry Journal of analytical chemistry Journal of analytical chemistry of ussr Journal of anatomy Journal of andrology Journal of Animal and Plant sciences Journal of animal ecology Journal of animal health and production Journal of animal science Journal of antibiotics Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy Journal of aoac Journal of Applied and Emerging Sciences Journal of applied bacteriology Journal of applied chemistry Journal of applied chemistry and biotechnology Journal of applied chemistry of ussr Journal of applied ecology Journal of applied econometrics Journal of applied electrochemistry Journal of applied mechanics Journal of applied physics Journal of applied physiology Journal of applied polymer science Journal of applied psychology Journal of applied science and engineering Journal of applied toxicology Journal of architectural education Journal of Asian and African Studies Journal of asian civilizations journal of Asian Natural Products Research Journal of asian studies Journal of asiatic society of bengal Journal of atmospheric chemistry Journal of atmospheric science Journal of Ayub Medical College Journal of bacteriology Journal of bahrain medical society Journal of bangladesh academy of sciences Journal of banking and finance Journal of Baqai Medical University Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences Journal of Behavioral Sciences Journal of beijing university of traditional chinese medicines Journal of biochemical and biophysical methods Journal of biochemistry Journal of biochemistry, molecular biology & biophysics Journal of biological chemistry Journal of biological science research Journal of Biological Sciences Journal of biomechanical engineering Journal of Biomolecular Screening Journal of bioscience & bioengineering Journal of biosocial sciences Journal of biotechnology Journal of bone and joint surgery american volume Journal of bone and joint surgery british volume Journal of bone and joint surgery quinquennial index Journal of bone and mineral research Journal of building research Journal of business Journal of Business & Economics Journal of business and economic statistics Journal of Business and Society Journal of business finance and accounting Journal of business management Journal of Business Strategies Journal of canada pakistan cooperation Journal of canadian petroleum technology JOURNAL OF CARDIOPULMONARY REHABILITATION Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia Journal of cardiovascular pharmacology Journal of cardiovascular surgery Journal of cataract and refractive surgery Journal of cell biology Journal of cell science Journal of cellular physiology Journal of central asia Journal of cereal science Journal of change management Journal of chemical and engineering data Journal of chemical documentation Journal of chemical education Journal of chemical engineering of japan Journal of Chemical Information and modelling Journal of chemical physics Journal of Chemical Society of Pakistan Journal of chemical technology and biotechnology Journal of chemistry JOURNAL OF CHILD NEUROLOGY Journal of child psychology and psychiatry and allied disciplines Journal of chiropractice Journal of chromatographic sciences Journal of chromatography Journal of chronic diseases Journal of clinical and hospital pharmacy Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism Journal of clinical epidemiology Journal of clinical ethics Journal of clinical investigation Journal of clinical microbiology Journal of clinical oncology Journal of clinical pathology Journal of clinical pharmacology Journal of clinical psychiatry Journal of clinical ultrasound Journal of College of Physicians and Surgeons Pakistan Journal of Combinatorial Chemistry Journal of common market studies Journal of communicable diseases Journal of Communication JOURNAL OF COMMUNITY NURSING Journal of comparative physiology a and b Journal of computational physics Journal of computer and system sciences Journal of computer assisted tomography Journal of construction engineering and management Journal of consumer research Journal of contemporary asia Journal of continuing education in nursing Journal of cranio maxillofacial surgery Journal of cross cultural psychology Journal of crystal growth JOURNAL OF CULTURAL DIVERSITY Journal of current laser abstracts Journal of cyclic nucleotide protein phosphorylatic research Journal of dairy science Journal of democracy Journal of developing areas Journal of development economics Journal of development planning Journal of development studies Journal of developmental studies Journal of dhaka medical college Journal of Diabates and its Complications Journal of diarrhoeal diseases research Journal of documentation Journal of donghus university , former journal of china textile university Journal of Dow University of Health Sciences Journal of drainage and water management Journal of earthquake engineering Journal of ecology Journal of economic cooperation among islamic countries Journal of economic dynamics and control Journal of economic entomology Journal of economic issues Journal of economic literature Journal of economic perspectives Journal of economic theory Journal of Education and Research Journal of Education Research Journal of Educational Research Journal of electrical engineering and technology Journal of electro chemical society Journal of electroanalytical chemistry and interfacial electrochemistry Journal of electrochemical of india Journal of electron spectroscopy and related phenomena Journal of electronic materials Journal of Elementary Education Journal of emergency nursing Journal of endocrinological investigation Journal of endocrinology Journal of endocrinology and metabolism Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences Journal of engineering education Journal of engineering for gas turbine and power Journal of engineering for industry Journal of engineering islamic republic of iran Journal of engineering manufacture, proceedings of the I mech E part-B Journal of engineering mathematics Journal of engineering sciences Journal of entrepreneurship Journal of environment and development Journal of environmental engineering Journal of environmental health Journal of environmental management Journal of environmental quality Journal of environmental science and health part a Journal of Enzyme Inhibition and Medicinal Chemistry Journal of epidemiology and community health Journal of ethnopharmacology Journal of experimental and clinical cancer research Journal of experimental botany Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology Journal of experimental medicine Journal of experimental zoology Journal of faculty of engineering & technology Journal of Faculty of Pharmacy of Ankara University Journal of family practice Journal of farm economics Journal of ferrocement Journal of finance Journal of financial economics Journal of financial management and analysis Journal of financial services marketing Journal of fish biology Journal of fluid mechanics Journal of food agriculture & environment science and technology Journal of food processing and preservation Journal of food science Journal of food science and technology Journal of forensic sciences Journal of friction and wear Journal of gastroenterology Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology Journal of gender Journal of Gender and Social Issues Journal of general and applied microbiology Journal of General Chemistry of the USSR Journal of general microbiology Journal of general physiology Journal of general virology Journal of geochemical exploration (association of exploration -geochemists) Journal of geology Journal of geophysical research Journal of geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering (asce) Journal of guidance control and dynamics Journal of hand surgery Journal of hazardous materials Journal of health administration education Journal of health economics JOURNAL OF HEALTH POPULATION AND NUTRITION Journal of heat transfer Journal of hebei college of geology Journal of helminthology Journal of hepatology Journal of heredity Journal of heterocyclic chemistry Journal of Himalayan Earth Sciences Journal of histochemistry and cytochemistry Journal of history and philosophy of science Journal of human hypertension Journal of human resources Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences Journal of hydraulic engineering Journal of hydraulics division Journal of hygiene Journal of hygiene epidemiology microbiology and immunology Journal of ima Journal of immunological methods Journal of immunology Journal of Independent Studies and Research Journal of Independent Studies and Research on Computing Journal of indian potato association Journal of indian society of agricultural engineers Journal of industrial and engineering chemistry Journal of industrial economics Journal Of Industrial Textiles Journal of infection Journal of Infection and Public Health Journal of infectious diseases JOURNAL OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES & ANTIMICROBIAL AGE Journal of Information and Communication Technology Journal of information science Journal of inorganic and nuclear chemistry ( new title: polyhedron) Journal of insect physiology Journal of Institute of Bankers in Pakistan Journal of institution of electrical and electronics engineers Journal of institutional and theoretical economics Journal of Intellectual Property Rights Journal of international development Journal of international economics Journal of International Marketing Journal of international trade and economic development Journal of invertebrate pathology Journal of investigative medicine Journal of Iran University of Medical Sciences Journal of irrigation and drainage engineering Journal of islamic academy of sciences Journal of Islamic Banking and Finance Journal of islamic studies Journal of Japan Pediatric Society/Acta Pediatrica Japonica Journal of karachi physics society Journal of laboratory and clinical medicine Journal of labour economics Journal of laryngology and otology Journal of law and Society Journal of Liaquat University of Medical and Health Sciences Journal of lightwave technology Journal of lipid research Journal of liquid chromatography Journal of macroeconomics Journal of macromolecular science part c: reviews in macromolecular chemistry Journal of magnetic resonance Journal of mammalogy Journal of Management and Social Sciences Journal of management in engineering Journal of management information system Journal of Managerial Sciences Journal of manufacturing systems Journal of marketing Journal of Marketing Management Journal of marketing research Journal of Marriage and the Family Journal of Mass Communication Journal of Mass Spectrometry Journal of materials engineering Journal of materials engineering and performance Journal of materials research Journal of materials science Journal of materials science letters Journal of materials science: materials in electronics Journal of materials science: materials in medicine Journal of materials: design and applications: proceedings of the I mech E part-L Journal of mathematical analysis and applications Journal of mathematical and physical sciences Journal of mathematical economics Journal of mathematical physics Journal of mathematical sciences Journal of mathematics Journal of mechanical engineering science Journal of mechanics and physics of solids Journal of Media Studies Journal of medical education Journal of medical genetics Journal of medical microbiology Journal of Medical Research Journal of Medical Science Journal of medical society toho university Journal of Medicinal Chemisrty Journal of medicinal chemistry Journal of medicine Journal of medicine and philosophy Journal of membrane biology Journal of membrane science Journal of mental deficiency research Journal of metals Journal of micro computer applications Journal of microbiology epidemiology and immunobiology Journal of microscopy Journal of midwifery and women's health Journal of mississippi state medical association Journal of mixed methods research Journal of modern medical science Journal of modern optics (formerly: optica acta) Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology Journal of molecular biology JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTICS Journal of Molecular Endocrinology Journal of Molecular Evolution Journal of Molecular Science Journal of monetary economics Journal of Money Credit and Banking Journal of morphology Journal of Muhammad Medical College Journal of nara medical association/nara igaku zasshi Journal of natural history Journal of natural products Journal of Natural Sciences and mathematics Journal of Natural Toxins Journal of near eastern studies Journal of nematology JOURNAL OF NEPAL MEDICAL ASSOCIATION Journal of nephrology, urology and transplantation Journal of neuro surgery Journal of neurological sciences Journal of neurological surgery Journal of neurology, neurosurgery and psychiatry Journal of neurophysiology Journal of neuroscience methods Journal of neurosurgery Journal of new horizons Journal of nippon medical school JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR CARDIOLOGY Journal of nuclear energy Journal of nuclear energy part a/b: reactor science and technology Journal of nuclear materials Journal of nuclear medicine Journal of nuclear medicine technology (jnmt) Journal of nuclear science and technology Journal of nurse midwifery Journal of nursing administration Journal of nursing education Journal of nursing management Journal of nursing scholarship Journal of nursing staff development (jnsd) Journal of nutrition Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology research Journal of obstetrics gynaecologic and neonatal nursing Journal of occupational accidents Journal of occupational and environmental medicine Journal of occupational medicine Journal of Optical Communications and Networking Journal of optics Journal of optoelectronics and advanced materials Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery Journal of organic chemistry Journal of organic chemistry of ussr Journal of organizational behavior Journal of organometallic chemistry Journal of orthodontics Journal of otolaryngology Journal of Pakistan Association of Dermatologists Journal of Pakistan Dental Association Journal of Pakistan Institute of Chemical Engineers Journal of pakistan institute of medical sciences Journal of Pakistan Medical Association Journal of Pakistan Orthopedic Association Journal of Pakistan Psychiatric Society Journal of palestine studies 1971 Journal of parallel and distributed computing Journal of parasitology Journal of pathology Journal of pathology and bacteriology Journal of peasant studies Journal of pediatric hematology / oncology (jpho) Journal of pediatrics Journal of pediatrics gastroenterology and nutrition Journal of pediatrics nursing Journal of pediatrics orthopaedics Journal of pediatrics surgery Journal of perinatal and neonatal nursing Journal of petroleum technology Journal of pharmaceutical sciences Journal of pharmaco kinetics and biopharmaceutics Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics Journal of pharmacy Journal of pharmacy and pharmacology Journal of phase equilibria (formerly: the bulletin of alloy phase diagrams and incorporating the journal of alloy phase diagrams) Journal of physical chemistry Journal of physics Journal of physics (b) atomic, molecular and optical physics Journal of physics (d) applied physics (formerly: british journal of app physics) Journal of physics a mathematical and general (formerly: proceedings of physical society) Journal of physics and chemistry of solids Journal of physics c solid state physics Journal of physics g nuclear physics Journal of physics: B: Atomic and molecular physics Journal of physics: condensed matter (formerly: journal of physics) Journal of physics: D: Applied physics Journal of physiology Journal of Plankton Research Journal of planning education and research Journal of Plant Regesteration Journal of plasma physics journal of plastic, reconstructive and aesthetic surgery (formerly: british journal of plastic surgery) Journal of Policy Analysis and Management Journal of policy modelling Journal of political economy Journal of Political Science Journal of polymer science: a: polymer chemistry edition Journal of polymer science: b: polymer physics edition Journal of polymer science: c: polymer letters edition Journal of polymer science: macromolecular reviews Journal of portfolio management Journal of Postgraduate Medical Institute peshawar Journal of power and energy: proceedings of the I mech E part A Journal of power sources Journal of process mechanical engineering: proceedings of the I mech E part E Journal of productivity analysis Journal of professional nursing Journal of propulsion and power Journal of protein chemistry Journal of protozoology Journal of psychiatry-neurology Journal of psychosocial nursing and mental health services Journal of psychosomatic research Journal of public economics Journal of public health medicine Journal of public transportation Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences Journal of Quality and Technology Management Journal of quality technology Journal of quantitative spectroscopy and radiative transfer Journal of radiological protection Journal of Rawalpindi Medical College Journal of regional cultural institute Journal of regional science Journal of regional studies Journal of rehabilitation research and development Journal of Religious Studies Journal of reproduction and fertility Journal of reproductive immunology Journal of reproductive medicine Journal of Research Journal of Research (Humanities) Journal of research and development Journal of Research in Architecture and Planning Journal of research of national bureau of standards Journal of Research Science Journal of Research Society of Pakistan Journal of Reserch and Reflections in Education Journal of rheumatology Journal of risk and reliability: proceedings of the I mech E part O Journal of royal college of general practitioners Journal of royal college of physicians of london Journal of royal society of medicine Journal of royal statistical society series a: general society Journal of royal statistical society series b: methodological Journal of royal statistical society series c: applied statistics Journal of Rural Development and Administration Journal of russian laser research (formerly: journal of soviet laser research) Journal of S& T Policy and Scientometrics Journal of Saidu Medical College Journal of Saudi Chemical Society Journal of science Journal of science and engineering research Journal of Science and Technology Journal of science islamic republic of iran Journal of scientific and industrial research Journal of Scientific Research Journal of sedimentary petrology Journal of semitic studies Journal of services institute of medical sciences Journal of Sheikh Zayed Medical College Journal of social issues Journal of social psychology Journal of Social Sciences Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities Journal of Social Sciences and Interdisciplinary Research Journal of solution chemistry Journal of south asian and middle eastern studies Journal of soviet laser research (new title: journal of russian laser research) Journal of statistical physics Journal of Statistics Journal of stored products research Journal of strain analysis for engineering design Journal of structural chemistry ussr Journal of structural engineering Journal of surgery Journal of Surgery Pakistan Journal of surgical oncology Journal of surgical research Journal of surveying engineering Journal of Sustainable Agriculture Journal of sustainable development Journal of synchrotron radiation Journal of synthetic methods Journal of systems and control engineering: proceedings of the I mech E part I Journal of Systems Management Journal of teacher education Journal of technical physics Journal of testing and evaluation Journal of Textile Engineering (Formerly: Journal of the Textile Machinery Society of Japan) Journal of textile institute Journal of the acm Journal of the Amercan Chemical Society Journal of the american academy of ophthalmology Journal of the american ceramic society abstracts Journal of the american chemical society Journal of the american college of surgeons (formerly: surgery: gynaecology and obstetrics) Journal of the american leather chemists association Journal of the american medical association Journal of the american medical association pakistan Journal of the american medical record association Journal of the american society for information science Journal of the American Veterinary Journal of the Arab Board of Medical Specialization Journal of the asiatic society of pakistan Journal of the association for computing machinery Journal of the astronautical sciences Journal of the atmospheric sciences Journal of the Bahrain Medical Society Journal of the bombay natural history society Journal of the british medical association (bmj) Journal of the chemical society, faraday transaction i Journal of the chemical society, faraday transactions ii Journal of the chemical society, perkin transaction i Journal of the Chinese Chemical Society Journal of the computer society of india Journal of the electrochemical society Journal of the faculty of science Journal of the Geological Society of India Journal of the geological society, london Journal of the history of ideas Journal of the history of philosophy Journal of the indian chemical society Journal of the indian institute of architects Journal of the indian mathematical society Journal of the Indian Roads Congress Journal of the indian society of soil science Journal of the institute of metals and metallurgical abstracts Journal of the institute of metals: an international journal of metals research and application Journal of the institute of nuclear material management (formerly: nuclear material management) Journal of the institute of town planners india Journal of the institution of electronics and telecommunication engineers Journal of the institution of engineers Journal of the institution of engineers australia Journal of the Iranian Chemical Society Journal of the korean nuclear society Journal of the kuwait medical association Journal of the Lebanese Dental Association JOURNAL OF THE MEDICAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION Journal of the minerals, metals and materials society (formerly: journal of metals) Journal of the national cancer institute Journal of the national institute of electronics Journal of the national research council of thailand Journal of the national science council of sri lanka Journal of the oceanographical society of japan Journal of the operational research society Journal of the optical society of america Journal of the optical society of america: b optical physics Journal of the pakistan physiotherapy society Journal of the physical society of japan Journal of the postgraduate school Journal of the royal asiatic society JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS OF LOND Journal of the royal college of surgeons of edinburgh Journal of the royal college of surgery Journal of the royal microscopical society JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF MEDICINE Journal of the society for industrial and applied mathematics Journal of the society of dyers and colourists Journal of the society of leather trades chemists Journal of thermal analysis JOURNAL OF THORACIC AND CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY Journal of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine (j tissue eng regen m) Journal of transcultural nursing Journal of transport geography Journal of transportation engineering Journal of trauma Journal of tropical medicine and hygiene Journal of tropical paediatrics Journal of ultrastructure research Journal of university of peshawar Journal of urban design Journal of urban planning and development Journal of urology Journal of vaccum science and technology (a: vaccum surfaces and films) Journal of vaccum science and technology (b: micro electronics) Journal of Vascular Research Journal of vascular surgery Journal of vertebrate paleontology Journal of virology JOURNAL OF VISUAL COMMINUCATION IN MEDICINE Journal of volcanology and geothermal research Journal of water resources planning and management division Journal of west china university medical science Journal of wildlife management Journal of zhejiang university science Journal watch Juba Medical Journal Juntendo medical journal Justus liebigs annalen der chemie Kagaku kogaku chemical engineering Karachi psychiatric hospital bulletin Karachi university journal of research Karachi University Journal of Science Kashmir economic review Kashmir Insight Kashmir Journal of Geology kashmir journal of language research (kjlr) Kashmir Mirror Kawasaki steel technical report Keio economic studies Kemisk tidskrfft Kennedy institute of ethics journal Kerntechnik (formerly: atomkernenergie/kerntechnik) Key indicators of developing member countries of adb Key neurology and neurosurgery Key to turkish science: biological sciences Key to turkish science: chemistry Key to turkish science: physical sciences Khabar-o-Nazar Khaber nama hamdard Khyber Medical University Journal Kidney international Kidney: a current survey of world literature Kiee international transactions on electrical machinery and energy conversion systems Kiee international transactions on electrophysics and applications Kiee international transactions on power engineering Kinetics and catalysis Kisan Time Knitting international Knowledge international Korea and world affairs Korea focus Korean journal of crop science Korean journal of horticultural science & technology Korean scientific abstracts Kust medical journal Kuwait medical journal Kyklos La cellule La education Lab asia Laboratory hazards bulletin Laboratory investigation Laboratory investigations: journal of the academy of pathology Laboratory management Laboratory medicine Labour and society Labour history Labour, capital and society Lahore Journal of Economics Lahore Journal of Policy Studies Lahore school case study journal Lancet LANCET ONCOLOGY Land degradation and development Land economics Landbauforschung vTI Agriculture and Forestry Research Langmuir: journal of surfaces and colloids Language learning Laproscopic Surgery Update Laryngoscope Laser and unconventional optics journal Laser focus world Le vide less couches minces: theory practqui et applications industriales Leather international journal of the industry Leather science abstracts Leprosy in india Leprosy review Les memoires scientifiques de la revue de metallurgie Letters al nuovo cimento letters in Drug Design & Discovery Letters in Organic Chemistry Leukemia research Library acquisitions practice and theory Library and information science abstracts (formerly: library science abstracts) Library association record Library bulletin Library hi tech Library journal Library news bulletin Library of congress accession list south asia Library resources and technical services Library science with a slant to documentation Library trends Libri: international journal of libraries and information services Life sciences Light Linux journal Lisa Journal Literature of Music Fine Arts Literature update on wheat,barley and triticale Liver transplantation Local Government Long range planning lutheran M & e design: the journal of mechanical & electrical consulting engineers & designers Machine design Machine Learning Macromolecular reaction engineering Macromolecules Magazine of concrete research Magnetic resonance imaging clinic of north america Magnetic resonance in chemistry main gate Management accountant Management and labour studies Management development abstracts Management in government Management outlook Management review Management science Manchester school of economic and social studies Manpower review Manufacturing engineer Margalla Papers Margin Marine geology Marine research, journal of coastal and oceanic research Market Forces: Journal of Management Thought Mass journal of islamic science Mass spectrometry bulletin Materiale plastice Materials characterization (formerly: metallography) Materials engineering Materials evaluation Materials letters Materials performance (formerly: material protection and performance) Materials science and engineering Materials science and engineering a Materials science and engineering b Materials science and engineering: c Materials science and technology Materials science in semiconductor processing Materials transactions (formerly: transactions of the japan institute of metals) Maternal and child health the journal of family medicine Mathematical reviews Mathematical sciences Mathematics and computers in simulation Mathematics of operations research Mayo clinic proceedings MCN: AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MATERNAL/CHILD NURSING Md online, Medicine Digest Measurement and control Measurement science and technology (formerly: journal of physics) Mechanical engineering Media in education and development Medical and pediatric oncology Medical care Medical Channel: Journal of Modern Dental and Medical Sciences Medical clinics of north america Medical economics Medical education Medical equipment journal of japan Medical Forum Medical gazette Medical international Medical Journal of Islamic World Academy of Sciences Medical journal of kagoshima university Medical journal of osaka university Medical letters on drugs and therapeutics Medical microbiology and immunology MEDICAL PEDIATRIC ONCOLOGY Medical physics Medical principles and practice Medical progress Medical Spectrum Medical teacher Medical times Medicinal and aromatic plants abstracts Medicinal Chemistry Medicine Medicine & science in sports & Exercise:Official Jounal of the American College of Sports Medicine Medicine digest Medicine digest pakistan Medicine international Medicine north america Medicine today Medicographia MEDLIP: Medical Literature Indexing Services in Pakistan Meetings on atomic energy Mehran University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology Melliand: international Menopause Digest Menopause Review:official organ of the European Menopause Society Message of Thaqalayn Metabolism: clinical and experimental Metal construction: the journal of the welding institute Metal finishing Metal finishing abstracts Metal powder report Metal progress Metallography Metallurgia and metal forming Metallurgical abstracts Metallurgical reviews Metallurgical transactions: b: process metallurgy Metals and materials Metals technology Methods METHODS & FINDINGS IN EXP. & CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY Micro and Nano Synthesis Microbiological reviews (formerly: bacteriological review) Microbiology Microbiology and immunology (formerly: japanese journal of microbiology) Microbiology and molecular biology reviews Microchemical journal Microelectronics and reliability Microelectronics digest Microelectronics journal Microlithography world Micropaleontology Microprocessors and microsystems Microsystems Microwave Journal International Microwaves and rf Middle east business and economic review Middle east journal Middle East Review Milbank memorial fund quarterly Milbank quarterly Military review Military simulation and training Minaret Mineralogical magazine Minerva Mini Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry Mini Reviews in Organic Chemistry Mirdc bulletin of abstracts Mirdc newsletter Mitsubishi electric advance Mobile communications international Mobile Networks and Applications Modern agriculture Modern asian studies Modern Law and Society Modern machine shop Modern medicine Modern medicine of canada Modern medicine:The Multidisciplanary Continuing Medical Education Journal Modern pathology Molecular and cellular biology Molecular and cellular endocrinology Molecular and general genetics Molecular Biosynthesis molecular Biosystem Molecular breeding Molecular Diagnosis Therapy Molecular endocrinology Molecular immunology Molecular Interventions Molecular Medicine Molecular Nutrition and Food Research Molecular pathology Molecular Pharmaceutics Molecular pharmacology Molecules and Cells Monitor MONOGRAPHS OF THE SOC. FOR RESEARCH IN CHILD DEVEV Monthly bulletin of statistics Monthly cotton review Monthly review Morbidity and mortality weekly report (mmwr) Mosaic Mother and Child Mount news Mountain research and development Mpt metallurgical plant and technology Mullard technical communications Mundus Muscle and nerve Muslim scientist Mutation breeding newsletter Mutation research Mycologia Mycopath: Journal of Mycology and Phytopathology N journal Nano structured materials National defence National Defence University Journal National Development and Security National development asia (formerly: national development) National documentation centre newsletter National food review National geographic National health National medical journal of china National medical journal of india National tax journal Natura (wwf) newsletter Natural history Natural Product Communications Natural product letters Natural product reports Natural Product Research Natural resources and development Nature Nature and resources (unesco) Nature biotechnology (formerly: biotechnology) NATURE CELL BIOLOGY Nature Chemistry Nature genetics NATURE IMMUNOLOGY Nature Materials Nature medicine NATURE NEUROSCIENCE Nature Reviews:Cancer Nature Reviews:Drug Discovery Nature Reviews:Genetics Nature Reviews:Immunology Nature Reviews:Microbiology Nature Reviews:Molecular Cell Biology Nature Reviews:Neuroscience Nature Structural & Molecular Biology Nature:Chemical Biology Nature:Immunology Nature:Medicine Nature:Methods Naunyn schmiedebergs archives of pharmacology Ncs bulletin Ncs jerida Ndc newsletter Nec research and development NED University Journal of Research Ned varsity news Nephrology, dialysis, transplantation (ndt) Nephron Netherlandss journal of agricultural science Netherlandss journal of sociology Network: family health international Networks drug bulletin Neural Computation Neuro sciences Neuroanatomy:an annual interdisciplinary of Neuroanatomy Neurologic clinics Neurological research Neurology Neurology india NEUROLOGY REPORT Neurology-psychiatry NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS Neuron Neuropediatrics Neuropharmacology Neuroradiology Neuroscience Neurosurgery Neurosurgery clinics of north america New civil engineer (nce) New electronics New england journal of medicine New horizon New Horizons: Journal of the Institution of Electrical & Electronics Engineers Pakistan New phytologist New scientist News & reviews News bulletin News in physiological science Newsweek Newzealand journal of science Nickel bulletin Nipa reporter Nira research output Nishtar Medical Journal Nll translations bulletin Non-destructive testing/australia Nonwovens industrial textiles Nonwovens Reports International Notiziario Novon journal of botanical nomenclature from the missouri botanical garden Nsta technology journal Nuclear data sheets Nuclear data tables Nuclear energy (formerly: journal of british nuclear energy society) Nuclear engineering and design/fusion Nuclear engineering international Nuclear europe worldscan (formerly: nuclear europe) Nuclear geophysics (formerly: international journal of radiation application and instrumentation part-e) Nuclear index Nuclear india Nuclear industry Nuclear instruments and methods in physics research Nuclear instruments and methods in physics research (b) beam interactions with materials and atoms Nuclear medicine and biology (formerly: international journal of radiation applications and instrumentation part-b) Nuclear medicine communications Nuclear news Nuclear physics Nuclear physics: b Nuclear power Nuclear safety Nuclear science abstracts of czechoslovakia Nuclear science abstracts of poland Nuclear science and applications Nuclear science and engineering Nuclear science information of japan (formerly: nuclear science abstracts of japan) Nuclear science journal Nuclear spectrum Nuclear standard news Nuclear technology Nuclear technology/fusion Nuclear tracks and radiation measurements Nucleic acids research Nucleonics week Nucleus Nukleonika Numerical heat transfer NUML-Journal of Critical Inquiry Nuovo cimento Nuovo cimento (serie decima a) Nuovo cimento: b Nuovo cimento: c Nuovo cimento: d Nurse educator Nurse practitioner Nursing Nursing and health care Nursing clinics of north america Nursing diagnosis Nursing economics NURSING ETHICS Nursing forum Nursing journal of india NURSING MANAGEMENT Nursing mirror Nursing outlook Nursing papers NURSING PHILOSOPHY Nursing research NURSING SCIENCE QUARTERLY Nursing standard Nursing success today Nursing times NUST Journal of Engineering Sciences NUST Journal of Natural Sciences nutrient cycling in agroecosystems (Formerly: fertilizer research) Nutrition abstracts and reviews Nutrition of man Nutrition planning Nutrition research Nutrition reviews Oak ridge national laboratory review Obstetrical and gynecological survey Obstetrician & gynaecologist Obstetrics and gynaecology Obstetrics and gynaecology clinics of north america Occupational and environmental medicine Ocean industry Oceanographic abstracts and bibliography (deep-sea research) Odyssey Official bulletin: series-a Official bulletin: series-b Official bulletin: series-c Oil and gas journal Oman medical journal On line journal of biological sciences Oncology Oops Messenger Operational Research Quarterly Operations research Ophthalmology Optical and quantum electronics Optical engineering Optics and lasers in engineering Optics and photonics news Optics and spectroscopy Optics communications Optics letters Optics news Opto electronics Oracle Orangi pilot project Orbit Organic Letters Organic magnetic resonance Organic mass spectrometry Organic process Research and Development Organometallic chemistry review Orthopaedic clinics of north america Orthopaedics Osaka city medical journal Ostomy International Otolaryngologic clinics of north america Otolaryngology: head and neck surgery oulooks on pest management Our planet Oxford bulletin of economics and statistics Oxford economic papers Oxford review of economic policy Oxidation of metals P.m.d.c. (gazetteer) Pacific affairs Pacific friends PAEDIATRIC ANAESTHESIA Paediatric clinics of north america Paediatrics in review Pain Pak atom Pak tobacco Pak Vacuum: A newsletter of Pakistan Vacuum Society Pakistan Agriculture: A Journal of Agriculture Foundation of Pakistan Pakistan and gulf economist Pakistan Armed Forces Medical Journal Pakistan army journal Pakistan burmah shell news Pakistan Business Review Pakistan Cotton Pakistan current contents Pakistan defence review Pakistan dental review Pakistan Development Review Pakistan Economic and Social Review Pakistan economic perspectives Pakistan economist Pakistan education journal Pakistan Engineer Pakistan engineering council newsletter Pakistan Entomologist Pakistan environmental digest Pakistan food and agricultural review Pakistan geophysical review Pakistan Heart Journal Pakistan Horizon Pakistan Horticulture Pakistan journal of agricultural and social sciences Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Economics Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Research Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Journal of Agriculture Pakistan Journal of Agriculture, Agricultural Engineering and Veterinary Sciences Pakistan Journal of American Studies Pakistan Journal of Analytical & Environmental Chemistry Pakistan Journal of Analytical Chemistry Pakistan journal of animal sciences Pakistan Journal of Applied Economics Pakistan Journal of Applied Sciences Pakistan journal of arid agriculture Pakistan Journal of Biochemistry Pakistan Journal of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Pakistan Journal of Biological and Agricultural Sciences Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences Pakistan Journal of Biotechnology Pakistan Journal of Botany Pakistan Journal of Cardiology Pakistan Journal of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery Pakistan journal of chemical psychology Pakistan Journal of Chest Medicine Pakistan journal of clinical psychiatry Pakistan Journal of Clinical Psychology Pakistan journal of community medicine Pakistan journal of distance education Pakistan journal of economics and management Pakistan Journal of Education Pakistan Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences Pakistan Journal of Engineering Horizon Pakistan Journal of Entomology Pakistan journal of family planning Pakistan Journal of Farming Pakistan Journal of Fisheries Pakistan Journal of Food Sciences Pakistan Journal of Forestry Pakistan Journal of Gastroenterology Pakistan Journal of Geography Pakistan Journal of Health Pakistan Journal of History and Philosophy of Science Pakistan Journal of Hydrocarbon Research Pakistan Journal of Life and Social Sciences Pakistan Journal of Life and Social Sciences Pakistan Journal of Livestock and Poultry Pakistan Journal of Livestock Research Pakistan Journal of Local Governement Pakistan Journal of Marine Biology Pakistan Journal of Marine Sciences Pakistan Journal of Medical Education Pakistan Journal of Medical Ethics Pakistan Journal of Medical Research Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences Pakistan Journal of Meterology Pakistan journal of microbiology Pakistan Journal of Nematology Pakistan Journal of Neurological Sciences Pakistan Journal of Neurology Pakistan Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Pakistan Journal of Ophthalmology Pakistan Journal of Otolaryngology,Head and Neck Surgery Pakistan Journal of Pathology Pakistan Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Pakistan Journal of Pharmacology Pakistan Journal of Pharmacy Pakistan Journal of Phytopathology Pakistan Journal of Plant Sciences Pakistan Journal of Psychological Research Pakistan journal of Psychology Pakistan Journal of Public Administration Pakistan Journal of Public Health Pakistan Journal of Science Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research Pakistan journal of scientific research Pakistan Journal of Seed Technology Pakistan Journal of Social Sciences Pakistan journal of social security Pakistan journal of soil science Pakistan Journal of Special Education Pakistan Journal of Statistics Pakistan Journal of Statistics and Operation Research Pakistan Journal of Surgery Pakistan Journal of Veterinary Research Pakistan Journal of Water Resources Pakistan Journal of Weed Science Research Pakistan Journal of Women's Studies Pakistan Journal of Zoology Pakistan Leather Trade Journal Pakistan Library and Information Science Journal Pakistan library bulletin Pakistan library review Pakistan Management Review Pakistan manpower review Pakistan medical forum Pakistan medical journal Pakistan metallurgist Pakistan ophthalmology Pakistan Oral and Dental Journal Pakistan paediatric cardiology journal Pakistan Pediatric Journal Pakistan Perspectives Pakistan Philosophical Journal Pakistan physiological society Pakistan pictorial Pakistan population review Pakistan Postgraduate Medical Journal Pakistan poultry Pakistan productivity Pakistan science abstracts Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section A: Agricultural Sciences) Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section B: Biochemistry & Biotechnology) Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section C: Chemical & Pharmaceutical Sciences) Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section D: Animal Sciences) Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section E: Earth & Environmental Sciences) Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section F: Physics) Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section G: Mathematics & Statistics) Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section H: Medical Sciences) Pakistan Science Abstracts (Section I: Information Communication & Engineering Sciences) Pakistan seafood digest Pakistan Steel Journal Pakistan Sugar Journal Pakistan systematics Pakistan textile journal Pakistan tobacco journal Pakistan Veterinary Journal Pakistan Vision Palawija news Palestinian Medical Journal Pan Arab Journal of Neurosurgery Papua new guinea medical journal Paradigm: A Journal of Commerce, Economics and Social Sciences Parallel computing Parasitology Parc news Parc research digest Particles and nuclei Paryavaran abstracts Pathologist Patient care: the journal of practical family medicine Patna journal of medicine Pc computing Pc magazine Pc magazine Pc world Pcat bulletin PCSIR bulletin Pediatric alert Pediatric anesthesia Pediatric annals Pediatric clinics of north america Pediatric infectious disease journal Pediatric nursing Pediatric research Pediatric reviews and communications Pediatrics Pediatrics in review Peking review People Perceptions: journal of international affairs Performit Periodicals of asia and the pacific Personal computing Personality study and group behavior Personel Computing Magazine Personnel Administration Personnel Administration and Public Personnel Review Perspectives in biology and medicine pesticide outlook (new title: outlook on pest management) Petroleum geoscience Pharmaceutical Biology Pharmacological reviews Pharmacology Phase transitions Philippine abstracts Philippine economic journal Philippine Journal of Public Administration Philippine journal of science Philippine nuclear journal Philippine science and technology abstracts Philips in science and industry Philips research reports Philips technical review Philosophical magazine Philosophical magazine (section a: defects and mechanical properties) Philosophical magazine (section b: electronics, optical and mechanical properties) Philosophical magazine letters Philosophical transactions of royal society of london (series a: mathematical and physical sciences) Philosophy and history Photochemistry and photobiology Photogrammetric Engineering Photographic science and engineering Photomethods Photonics spectra Php: a forum for a better world Phycologia Physica Physical chemistry Physical chemistry chemical physics (pccp) (formerly: journal of chemical society faraday transactions) Physical medicine and rehabilitation Physical review Physical review [a] general physics Physical review abstracts Physical review b condensed matter Physical review c: nuclear physics Physical review d: particles and fields Physical review e: Physical review letters Physical therapy Physics Physics abstracts Physics and chemistry of glasses Physics bulletin Physics in canada Physics in medicine and biology Physics in technology Physics letters: a Physics letters: b Physics of atomic nuclei Physics of fluids Physics of fluids - part a: fluid dynamics Physics of fluids - part b: plasma physics Physics of metals and metallography Physics reports (review section of physics letters) Physics teacher Physics today Physics/physique Physics-uspekhi (formerly: soviet physics uspekhi) Physiologia plantarum Physiological Genomics Physiological measurement Physiological reviews Physiology Physiotherapy Phytochemical analysis Phytochemistry Phytomedicine Phytopathology Phytotherapie research Pide library bulletin Pla newsletter Planned parenthood challenges Plant and cell physiology Plant and soil Plant breeding Plant breeding abstracts Plant breeding and genetics newsletter Plant cell Plant cell reports Plant cell, tissue and organ culture Plant disease Plant engineering Plant growth regulator abstracts Plant Journal for Cell and Molecular Biology Plant medica Plant molecular biology reporter Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant tissue culture Planta medica Planta Medica:Journal of Medicinal Plant Research Plasma devices and operations Plasma physics and controlled fusion (formerly: plasma physics) Plasma physics index Plastic and reconstructive surgery Pmdc gazetter (bulletin of pakistan medical and dental council) Polish Journal of Chemistry Polish perspective Political quarterly Political science quarterly Polyhedron Polymer bulletin Polymer Contents Polymer journal Polymer mechanics Polymer report Polymer Reviews Polymer science ussr Popular electronics Popular mechanics Popular science Population Population and development review Population bulletin Population reports Population research and policy review Population studies Populi Postgraduate medical journal Postgraduate medicine Potato abstracts Potato journal Poultry guide Poultry science Powder diffraction Powder metallurgy Power engineering Power reactor technology Practical metallography Practitioner Prajnan: journal of social and management sciences Pramana Precision metal Prescribers journal Prevention Preventive medicine Primary care Problems of economics Proceedings Proceedings of american mathematical society Proceedings of national academy of sciences Proceedings of national science council Proceedings of Pakistan Academy of Sciences Proceedings of pakistan congress of zoology Proceedings of Parasitology Proceedings of sheikh zayed postgraduate medical institute Proceedings of the institute of electrical & electronics engineers Proceedings of the royal college of physicians of edinburgh Proceedings of the royal society of london a: mathematical and physical sciences Proceedings of the royal society of medicine Process biochemistry Product Production engineer: journal of institution of production engineers Productivity Journal Professional engineering (formerly: chartered mechanical engineer) Professional Medical Journal Professional nurse Programming and computer software Progress in neurobiology Progress in theoretical physics Progressive farming Promotion and education Prospects: unesco review of education protein and Peptide letters Protein expression and purification Protein Profile Protein Science Protein: Structure, Function & Bioinformatics Proteins structure function and genetics Proteomics Proteomics: clinical applications Psychiatric annals Psychiatric clinics of north america Psychiatry Psychological medicine Psychology and developing societies Psychopharmacology bulletin psychotherapy research Public administration Public Administration and Development Public administration review Public affairs information service (pais) bulletin Public enterprise Public Opinion Public Personnel Management Publications of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences Publishers weekly Pudoc bulletin Pulse International Punjab fruit journal Punjab horticultural journal Punjab University Journal of Mathematics Punjab University Journal of Zoology Pure and applied chemistry Qatar construction QATAR MEDICAL JOURNAL Qimp quick index of medical preparations Quaid-e-Awam University Research Journal of Engineering and Technology Quality and reliability engineering international Quality engineer Quality progress Quantum Information and Computation Quarterly bibliography of major tropical diseases Quarterly bulletin of statistics for asia and the pacific Quarterly cummulative index medicus Quarterly journal of economics Quarterly journal of management development Quarterly journal of medicine Quarterly review Quarterly review of agricultural economics Quarterly review of biology Quarterly review, chemical society Quarterly seismological bulletin of pakistan Quest Quick index of medical preparation Quintessence international (the journal of practical dentistry) Radiation botany (title changed to 'environmental and experimental botany') Radiation measurements (formerly: nuclear tracks and radiation applications and instrumentation pt-i) Radiation physics and chemistry Radiation protection dosimetry Radiation research Radio and electronic engineer Radiochemical and radioanalytical letters Radiochimica acta Radiochimie RADIOGRAPHICS Radioisotopes RADIOLOGIC CLINICS OF NORTH AMERICA Radiological clinics of north america Radiology Rahat's Medical Journal Rapra abstracts Rawal Medical Journal Reactor technology Reader's digest Reader's digest usa Recent Patent on Anti Cancer Drug Discovery Recent Patent on Anti infective Drug Discovery Recent Patent on Biomedical Engineering recent Patent on Biotechnology Recent Patent on Cardiovascular Drug Discovery Recent Patent on CNS Drug Discovery Recent Patent on DNA and Gene Sequencesu Recent Patent on Drug Delivery and Formulation Recent Patent on Endocrine Metabolic & ImmuneDrug Discovery Recent Patent on Engineering Recent Patent on Food Nutrition and Agriculture recent Patents on Inflammation & allergy Drug Discovery recent Patents on Material Science recent Patents on Nanotechnology Records of the zoological survey of india Records of the Zoological Survey of Pakistan Recueil: Journal of the Royal Netherland Chemical Society Red crescent Refractories - ogneupory Refractories journal Refrigeration and air conditioning Regional anesthesia and pain medicine regional development dialogue Regional science and urban economics (formerly: regional and urban economics) Regional Studies Rejuvenation Research Reliability engineering and system safety Renewable energy Reprographics quarterly Research and industry Research and technology briefs Research bulletin Research in nursing and health Research in veterinary sciences Research journal Research journal of grassroots Research Journal University of Balochistan Research observer (world bank) Research policy Research quarterly Research reactor journal Reservoir Reservoir newsletters Resident & Staff Physician Resident and staff physician Resource & environmental biotechnology Resources and energy Respiratory medicine Review of agricultural economics Review of applied entomology Review of economic studies Review of economics and statistics Review of income and wealth Review of infectious diseases Review of international affairs Review of modern physics Review of plant pathology Review of pure and applied chemistry Review of scientific instruments Review of Textile Progress review of world economics Reviews in chemical engineering Reviews in inorganic chemistry Reviews on Recent Clinical Trials Revista chilena De Cirugia Revue de metallurgie Revue de physique appliquee Riazi: Journal of Karachi Mathematical Association Rice abstracts Rice literature update Rice today Rice Today Richerche di mathematica Rivista del nuovo cimento Romanian engineering Romanian review Royal institute of chemistry journal Rubber chemistry and technology Rural energy Rural sociology Russian chemical reviews Russian engineering journal Russian journal of inorganic chemistry Russian journal of non-destructive testing (formerly: soviet journal of non-destructive testing upto 1991) Russian journal of physical chemistry S/v sound & vibration Saarc expeditions Saarc journal of agriculture SAARC Journal of Human Resource Development Saarc newsletter Saic newsletter Sankhya indian journal of statistics series a Sarhad Journal of Agriculture Saudi journal of gastroenterology Saudi journal of kidney diseases and transplantation Saudi kidney disease and transplantation bulletin Saudi medical journal Saudi pharmaceutical journal Sauni news Savings and development Scala international Scandinavian journal of economics (formerly: swedish j of economics) Scandinavian journal of immunology Scanner Science Science and development Science and energy newsletter (formerly: science newsletter) Science and industry Science and society Science and technology in japan Science and technology in the islamic world Science and technology review Science bachon ke liay Science chronicle Science forum Science in china: a (formerly: scientia sinica) Science International Science international newsletter Science news Science of the total environment Science progress Science research abstracts b Science teacher Science Vision Science, Technology and Development Scientia Iranica Scientia sinica Scientific american Scientific american medicine Scientific american surgery Scientific information bulletin Scientific khyber Scientific research Scientific Sindh Scientist (Pakistan association scientist and scientific professional) Scotish journal of political economy Scotish medical journal Scripta materialia (formerly: scripta metallurgica et materialia) Sdpi news and research bulletin SDPI,Population and Environment Search Search: Science, Technology and Society Sedimentology Seed and plants: journal of agricultural research Seed news Seed research Seismological research letters Selected water resources abstracts Semiconductor international Semiconductor news Semiconductor science and technology Seminars in diagnostic pathology Seminars in hematology Seminars in nephrology Seminars in neurology Seminars in nuclear medicine Seminars in oncology Seminars in ultrasound ct and mri Separation science and purification methods Separation science and technology Sexually transmitted diseases Siam journal on numerical analysis Siam review Siemens electro medica Siemens review Sigchi bulletin Simulation Simulation digest Sindh balochistan journal of plant sciences Sindh journal of agricultural research Sindh University Journal of Education Sindh University Research Journal Sindh zarrat Sindh ziraat nama Sindhological studies Singapore economic review (formerly: malayan economic review) Singapore medical journal Sky and telescope Sleep Snake Social biology Social forces Social Research Social science Software Engineering Notes Software practice and experience Software practice express Soil & Environment Soil association Soil biology and biochemistry Soil conservation Soil newsletter Soil science Soil science and plant nutrition Soil science society of america journal Soils and foundations Soils and tillage research Solar cells Solar energy Solar physics Solid state abstracts journal Solid state communications Solid state electronics Solid state technology (formerly: semiconductor products and sold state technology) Solvent extraction and ion exchange Sonoace International:Ultrasound Clinical magazine from medison Source South africa South african journal of economics South asia bulletin South asian anthropologist South asian journal South asian review South Asian Studies South pacific study Southeast asian journal of tropical medicine and public health Southern medical journal Soviet atomic energy (formerly: soviet journal of atomic energy) Soviet electro chemistry Soviet export Soviet journal of glass physics and chemistry Soviet journal of marine biology Soviet journal of nuclear physics Soviet journal of quantum electronics Soviet physics :semiconductors Soviet physics- acoustics Soviet physics- crystallography Soviet physics- doklady Soviet physics- jetp Soviet physics: solid state Soviet physics-technical physics Soviet physics-uspekhi Soviet radiochemistry Soviet soil science Soviet technical physics letters Space aeronautics Space horizons Space science reviews Special libraries Specialist(usa) Spectrochemica acta (a): molecular spectroscopy Spectrochimica acta: b: atomic spectroscopy Spectroscopy Asia Spectroscopy europe Spectroscopy letters Spectrum: british science news Spider Spine Spintech Spotlight: news views and innovation in education and science Sri lanka economic journal sri lanka journal of tea science (formerly: tea quartelry) Sri lanka science index Stain technology Star scientific and technical aerospace reports Statistical bulletin Statistical indicators for asia and the pacific Statistical sciences Statistician Steel today and tomorrow Steroids Strategic Studies Stroke Structural engineering and mechanics Structural engineering international Student Studies in applied mathematics Studies in family planning Studies of history of medicine & science Study of the tuche idea tokyo japan Sugar industry abstracts Sugar y azucar Sultan qaboos university medical journal Suparco times Surface and coatings technology Surface coatings industrial finishing and their applications Surface science Surgeons Surgeons news Surgery Surgery gynaecology and obstetrics Surgery international Surgical clinics of north america Surgical express Surgical neurology Surgical oncology clinics of north america Surgimed Medical and Dental Journal Survey methodology Survey of current affairs Survey of ophthalmology Surveys in geophysics Survival Symposia of faraday society Synlett Synopsis of swedish building research Synthesis & reactivity in inorganic & metal-organic chemistry Synthetic communications Talanta (international journal of pure and applied analytical chemistry) Talimi zaviey Tax forum Tech shelf Technical book review index Technical bulletin Technical cooperation: a monthly bibliography Technical Journal Technical physics (formerly: soviet physics technical physics) Technical review Technicka knihovna Techno japan Techno times: a journal for technocrats Technology Force: Journal of Engineering and Science Technology index for plasma physics research and fusion reactors Technology information Technology information on water resources Technology journal Technology reporter Technology review Technology window Tectonophysics Telecommunication and radio engineering Telecommunication journal Tellus a: dynamic meteorology and oceanography Tellus b: chemical and physical meteorology Term net news Tesol Tetrahedron Tetrahedron asymmetry Tetrahedron letters Texas medicine Textech Textil Praxis International Textile asia Textile chemists and colorist and american dyestuff reporter Textile institute and industry Textile institute journal Textile Master Textile monthly Textile progress Textile research journal Textile technology digest Textile Technology International Textile Today Textile Trends Textile world The American Journal of Surgery The British Journal of Monthly Surgery The Economist The Gynaecologist The International Journal of Environmental studies The International Journal of Mineral Resources Engineering The Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences The Journal of Islamic International Medical College The Journal of laryngology & Otology The Journal of Pakistan Academy of Ophthalmology The Journal of the American Medical Association The Middle East Journal of Emergency Medicine The Mother and Child Care The New Iraqi Journal of Medicine The Obstetrician & Gynaecologist The Otolyrangologic Clinics of North America The Professional Medical Journal The Radiologic Clinics of North America The Saudi Dental Journal Theoretica chemica acta Theoretical & experimental chemistry Theoretical and applied genetics Theoretical and computational fluid dynamics Theoretical chemical engineering abstracts Theory of probability and its applications Therapeutic drug monitoring Therapeutic notes Theriogenology Thermal analysis abstracts Thermal engineering Third world quarterly Thorax Thrombosis and haemostasis Thrombosis research Tiger papers Time Time higher education supplement Time magzine Time review of industry and technology Tinbergen institute research bulletin Toxicology Toxicology and applied pharmacology Trade and industry Trade chronicle Trade journal Traffic engineering control Transactions Transactions of american geophysical union Transactions of american institute of chemical engineers Transactions of american mathematical society Transactions of american microscopical society Transactions of american nuclear society Transactions of american society of agricultural engineers Transactions of asme a journal of engineering for power Transactions of asme b journal of engineering for industry Transactions of asme c journal of heat transfer Transactions of asme d journal of basic engineering Transactions of asme e journal of applied mechanics Transactions of asme f journal of lubrication technology Transactions of asme g journal of dynamic systems measurement and control Transactions of asme h journal of materials and technology Transactions of asme i journal of fluids engineering Transactions of asme j journal of pressure vessel technology Transactions of asme: journal of biomechanical engineering Transactions of asme: journal of engineering for gas turbine and power Transactions of asme: journal of mechanical design Transactions of asme: journal of solar energy engineering Transactions of asme: journal of vibration, acoustics, stress and reliability in design Transactions of british ceramic society Transactions of institution of chemical engineers engineering research and design Transactions of japan institute of metals (title changed as "materials transactions, jim") Transactions of japan society of mechanical engineers Transactions of metallurgical society of aime Transactions of royal society of tropical medicine and hygiene Transactions of saest (society for advancement of electrochemical science and technology) Transactions of society of rhenology Transactions of the asme: journal of computing and information science in engineering Transctions of the faraday society Transfusion Transfusion medicine Translational corporations Transportation engineering journal of asce Trends in biochemical sciences Trends in biotechnology Trends in genetics Trends in neurosciences Trends in pharmacological sciences Trends in plant science Tropical abstracts Tropical diseases bulletin Tropical doctor Tropical medicine and international health Tropical science Tubercle and lung disease Tudomanyszervezesi tajekoztato Turkish journal of chemistry Turkish journal of medical and biological research Turkish journal of nuclear science Turkish journal of pediatrics Turkiye jeoloji bultani (geological bulletin of turkey) Ucla computer science department UET Research Journal Ultrasonics Ultrasound Clinical Magazine from Medison Unasylva Unep news letter Unesco asian pacific Unesco bulletin Unesco bulletin for libraries Unesco chronicle Unesco journal of information science librarianship and archives administration Unesco newsletter Unesco sources Unido news letter Unisist news letter unesco United arab republic journal of chemistry Universitas Universities quarterly University news bulletin Update Update: the journal of postgraduate general practice Urban ecology urdu nama Urologic clinics of north america Urology Vacuum solutions Varsities Varsity news Vascular Disease Prevention Vehicle system dynamics Vertebrata palasiatica Vertebrate Fauna of Korea Veterinary bulletin Veterinary parasitology Veterinary record Vibrational spectroscopy View point Virology Vitamins journal of the vitamin society of japan Voice Vox sanguinis Water air and soil pollution Water and wastes engineering Water and wastewater international Water pollution abstracts Water research journal Water resources abstracts Water resources research Water services (formerly: water and water engineering) Weather and crop report Web techniques Weed abstracts Weed research Weed science Weishengwu xuebao Welding and metal fabrication Welding in the world Welding journal Weltwirtschaftliches archiv West pakistan journal of agricultural research Western journal of medicine Western journal of nursing research Westing house engineer Who chronicle Who drug information Wildlife & environment Wireless world Wood energy news Wood science and technology Wool Science Review Worker World agricultural economics and rural sociology abstracts World aids World bank economic review World bank research observer World development World economy World Gastroenterology News World health World health forum World health statistics quarterly World journal of microbiology and biotechnology (formerly: mircen journal of applied microbiology and biotechnology) World journal of surgery World leather World oil World scientist (english edition of la recherche) World textile abstracts World translations index World water Yakugaku-Zasshi Yale review Yugoslave survey Zaed Zarrat baluchistan Zarrat sindh Zarrat-e-sarhad (urdu) Zarri digest (urdu) Zarri service Zeitschrift Fuer NatforschungB Zeitschrift fuer naturforschung Zeitschrift fuer Phytotherapie Zeitschrift fur physik (in two parts a and b) Zeitschrift fur physik a: atomic nuclei Zeitschrift fur physik b: condensed matter Zeitschrift fur physik d: atoms, molecules and clusters Zeitschrift fur physikalische chemie Zhonghua yixue zazhi Zoological record Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Feedback - Share Your Thoughts & Suggestions Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES PASTIC Services : Feedback You are requested to kindly provide the following information for sending your feedback. Thanks! Subject: * Name: * Email: * Phone: * Cell: * Message: * Human Check: * Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Comprehensive Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings from Universities & R&D Institutes Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Title/Organization Name Date SUBJECT : VENUE : 2nd International Conference SAICON 2010 entitled Nurturing Innovation, Entrepreneurship, Investment & Public Private Partnership in Global Environment held on 21-23 at Bhurban, Muree Organization Name: COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad 2010-08-23 Nurturing Innovation, Entrepreneurship, Investment & Public Private Partnership in Global Environment Bhurban,Murree International Conference on Energy Systems Engineering: ICESE-2010 held on October 25-27, 2010 at College of E&ME, NUST, Islamabad Organization Name: College of E& ME, NUST. IC&HRD Directorate NUwT , Islamabad 2010-10-27 International Conference on Energy Systems Engineering College of E&ME, NUST, Islamabad International Conference on Earthquake Engineering & Seismology (ICEES-2011) on 25-26 April, 2011 at National University of Science & Technology, Islamabad Organization Name: School of Civil and Environmental Engineering (SCEE) NUST Islamabad 2011-04-26 Earthquake Engineering & Seismology National University of Science & Technology, Islamabad Digital Innovation International Conference and Exhibition on 21-22 December, 2010 at Institute of Space Technology, Islamabad Organization Name: Institute of Space Technology, Islamabad 2010-12-22 Digital Innovation International Conference and Exhibition Institute of Space Technology, Islamabad 3rd National Symposium on Recent Trends in Endocrinology and Reproductive Sciences held on May 15-16, 2010 at the University of Lahore, Lahore Organization Name: University of Lahore, Lahore 2010-05-16 3rd National Symposium on Recent Trends in Endocrinology and Reproductive Sciences University of Lahore, Lahore 12th National Symposium on Frontiers in Physics at GC University, Lahore in Collaboration with National Centre for Physics, Islamabad on 2-4 February, 2011 Organization Name: G.C University , Lahore. 2011-02-04 Physics GC University, Lahore The Pakistan Institute of Physics Conference-2011 in Collaboration with Physics Department, University of Engineering & Technology, Lahore on 28-30 March, 2011 at UET, Lahore Organization Name: University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore 2011-03-30 University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore One day Workshop on Recent Trends in Entomological Education held on April 04, 2011 at University of Agriculture, Faisalabad Organization Name: University of Agriculture, Faisalabad 2011-04-04 Recent Trends in Entomological Education University of Agriculture, Faisalabad National Conference on the Strategies to Improve Meat Production is Pakistan held on October 13 , 2010 at Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan Organization Name: Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan 2010-10-13 Strategies to Improve Meat Production is Pakistan Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan National Biotechnology Exhibition and Seminar held on October 20-21, 2010 at University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore Organization Name: University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore 2010-10-21 National Biotechnology Exhibition and Seminar University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore 1st National Phycological Conference-2011 on March 30-31, 2011 at G.C University, Lahore Organization Name: G.C University, Lahore 2011-04-30 Phycological Conference G.C University, Lahore 2 days Workshop on VisioSpark 2010-A Series of Events held on 11-12 October, 2010 at COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Wah Cantt Organization Name: COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Wah Cantt 2010-10-12 COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Wah Cantt 12th International Symposium on Natural Product Chemistry held on November 22-25, 2010 at HEJ, University of Karachi, Karachi Organization Name: HEJ, University of Karachi, Karachi 2011-09-25 Symposium on Natural Product Chemistry HEJ, University of Karachi, Karachi International Conference on Biodiversity is Our Life held on December 29-31 at Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur, Sindh Organization Name: Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur, Sindh 2010-12-29 Biodiversity is Our Life Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur, Sindh International Conference on Current Technologies in Oils and Fats to be held on March 21-23 at Indus Hotel , Hyderabad, Sindh Organization Name: University of Sindh , Jamshoro 2010-04-23 Current Technologies in Oils and Fats Indus Hotel , Hyderabad, Sindh International Conference on Computer & Emerging Technologies (ICCET-2011) on 22-23 April, 2011 at Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur Organization Name: Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur 2011-04-23 Computer & Emerging Technologies Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur International Conference of Chemistry on Chemistry: Panacea o all problems" on January 03-05, 2011 at Jinnah University for Women, Karachi Organization Name: Jinnah University for Women, Karachi 2011-01-05 Chemistry: Panacea o all problems Jinnah University for Women, Karachi 9th International and 21st National Chemistry Conference-2011 on March 14-16, 2011 at University of Karachi Organization Name: University of Karachi, Karachi 2011-04-16 National Chemistry Conference University of Karachi, Karachi 2nd International Disaster Management Conference on "Good Governance in Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation to be held on 19-21 October , 2010 at University of Peshawar, Peshawar Organization Name: University of Peshawar, Peshawar 2010-10-21 Good Governance in Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation University of Peshawar, Peshawar 1st National Conference on Physical and Environmental Chemistry held on 27-30 September, 2010 at Bara Gali Organization Name: University of Peshawar, Peshawar 2010-09-30 Physical and Environmental Chemistry Bara Gali 4th All Pakistan Mechanical Engineering Conference, 2011 on 15th -17th April, 2011 at GIK Institute of Engineering Science & Technology, District Swabi, Topi Organization Name: GIK Institute of Engineering Science & Technology, District Swabi, Topi 2011-04-17 All Pakistan Mechanical Engineering Conference GIK Institute of Engineering Science & Technology, District Swabi, Topi Seminar on Cloud Computing Organization Name: COMSATS 2016-09-28 Seminar Hall, EE Department Pre Budget Seminar (Urdu News) Organization Name: Daily Jahan-e-Pakistan 2016-05-04 COMSATS University Islamabad Seminar on "Pakistans Climate and the impact of Changing Climate" by Dr. Muhammad Hanif Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2016-03-08 Department of Meteorology, CIIT Seminar on Types of ENSO Influences on South Asian Summer Monsoon Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2015-12-30 Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD), Islamabad Seminar on Types of ENSO Influences on South Asian Summer Monsoon Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2015-12-31 COMSATS University Islamabad Seminar on "Importance of Telecommunication and its Future trends" Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2014-02-25 Department of Computer Science, CIIT Islamabad. Qualitative Research Methodology & Data Analysis by Using NVivo Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2016-10-20 On-Line Workshop (Webinar) International Young Diplomats School Training Workshop on International Relations and Diplomacy Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2016-08-22 Centre for Policy Studies and Institute of Peace and Diplomatic Studies (IPDS) organized a three-day workshop on International Relations and Diplomacy for university students, faculty members, graduates, young professionals and researchers. The programme was designed to give the participants an exposure to practical application of diplomacy in the backdrop of international and global scenario in the conduct of bilateral and multilateral relations COMSATS University Islamabad PEC-CPD Workshop on LTE and Beyond Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2015-05-11 A brief outline of the workshop is : * Smart Grid Technologies and Smart Grid Communications * Distributed Generation and Micro Grids * Distribution and Transmission Automation * Load Control and Demand Response * Advanced Metering Infrastructure * Smart Grid Security * Plug-In Electric Vehicles (PEV) * Smart Grid Standards and Interoperability COMSATS University Islamabad One Week Advanced Workshop On Science, Technology and Innovation Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2015-10-05 Science and Technology result in a broad range of impacts on society. If harnessed in a positive way it can bring meaningful change in all aspects of societal activities. The progress achieved in various spheres of human life is manifest from a simple to a more complex range of international interactions. From the advances made in healthcare to managing climate change, science, technology and innovation are playing a critical role. By bringing ne Business Incubation Center, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology Workshop on "Jinns and Black Magic" Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2015-10-01 COMSATS University Islamabad Frontiers of Information Technology 2019 Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2016-12-28 COMSATS University Islamabad Research and Enterprise on Food Safety in Developing World Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2016-11-03 COMSATS University Islamabad International Conference on Sustainable Development Goal Organization Name: University Sains Malaysia (USM), Penang, Malaysia 2016-10-04 University Sains Malaysia (USM), Penang, Malaysia Climate Change World Campaign Group Conference 2015 Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2015-12-14 CCWCG Conference 15 themed ?Impacts of High Resolution Climatology on Sustainable Development" Climate Change Policy and Markets will provide a platform to discuss the future opportunities and challenges related to the design, development and commercialization of low carbon innovation, technologies, products and services. CCWCG Conference 15 will include invited and refereed papers from academics, consultants, entrepreneurs, investors, tech Hilton Hotels and Resorts London, United Kingdo 3 DAYS WORKSHOP ON ACADEMIC & CREATIVE WRITING PRACTICE Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2018-12-20 Aims of the Workshop Academic writing plays a significant role in the career development of students. Following will be the scope of the workshop: Participants will understand the importance of academic and creative writing. Participants will know how to obscure their thoughts and processing of thoughts. Participants will know how to primarily collect information, recode the information and how to get benefits from wisdom of other Allama Iqbal Auditorium Faisal Mosque Campus, International Islamic University, Islamabad 2-Day CASS-IIUI Workshop in Corpus Linguistics 2018 Organised by Department of English IIUI in collaboration with Lancaster University, UK Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2018-10-23 Department of English, Faculty of Languages and Literature, International Islamic University, Islamabad (IIUI) has organised a 2-Day CASS/IIUI Workshop in Corpus Linguistics 2018 in collaboration with The Centre for Corpus Approaches to Social Sciences (CASS) at Lancaster University, UK. Dr. Andrew Hardie, a renowned corpus linguist, from Lancaster University will be the resource person of the lectures and hands on training workshops that ar International Islamic University, Islamabad 3rd National Workshop on "Power Electronics with Renewable Integration" Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2019-04-11 International Islamic University, Islamabad Islamic Finance Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-05-16 International Islamic University, Islamabad Make your Research Life Easier with Mendeley Research Tool Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-05-11 The key objectives of the programme: To create awareness among the participants about PASTIC services. To enable the participants with fundamentals of citation. To introduce Mendeley -a cross-platform application (Windows, Mac, Linux, 'Phone) that helps researchers manage and annotate their scientific paper collections. Researchers can also set up collaborative projects, work and discuss in groups, and share data on Mendeley's web platform. International Islamic University, Islamabad Two Days Workshop on Defining the Scope of Research in The Paradigm of Islamic Studies Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-07-26 International Islamic University, Islamabad Islamic Finance Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-01-15 International Islamic University, Islamabad Islamization of Laws in Pakistan: An overview of the Role of Constitutional Institutions Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2019-02-26 Due to swift progress, never seen before in human history, it seems appropriate time to critically evaluate the various mechanisms of Islamization process, analyze what has been Islamized through adjudication, statutory enactments or otherwise; inquire into the Islamicity of Islamized laws; gauge the various impediments in the process of Islamization; thoroughly scrutinize the steps necessary that will pave the way for the process of the Islamiza International Islamic University, Islamabad Seminar on Islamic Development Bank Transformers Roadshow Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2019-04-15 International Islamic University, Islamabad Seminar in Urdu Department Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2018-10-04 International Islamic University, Islamabad Seminar on Striving Together for Thalassemia Free Pakistan Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2018-05-08 International Islamic University, Islamabad Two Day International Seminar on Needs of Society and Qualification of Graduates Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2018-05-14 Inputs and interventions needed to boost up overall capacities of youth to enable them constructive individuals of the society, Role of higher education institutes in satisfying the youth current needs and fulfilling societal needs Relevance of students qualification and current demands of the society Iqbal Auditorium, Faisal Masjid Campus, IIUI : Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2018-05-02 International Islamic University, Islamabad NATIONAL SEMINAR ON CURRICULUM: THEORY AND PRACTICE IN PAKISTAN Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2018-03-08 This research seminar is based on deliberation on national needs and curriculum of educational institutions. This two days seminar will provide an open forum for discussion to identify national needs and discrepancies in educational policy and curriculum that would lead practical suggestions and experts views about how to bridge gap between national needs and curriculum to meet future demands. It will open the new horizons in the field of cur International Islamic University, Islamabad International Seminar entitled Strengthening Health Care with Eastern Medicine for Growth and Development of Socio- Economic Environment Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2017-05-02 International Islamic University, Islamabad Seminar on Competition Law Organization Name: Competition Commission of Pakistan 2016-12-14 Competition Policy and Competition Agencies and Animation An Overview of the Competition Law OFT Deceptive Marketing practices International Islamic University, Islamabad Seminar in Urdu Department Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-09-27 International Islamic University, Islamabad Seminar in Urdu Department Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-09-27 International Islamic University, Islamabad Condolence Reference Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-05-10 International Islamic University, Islamabad (Refresher course for doctoral students) Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-04-25 International Islamic University, Islamabad Official Statistics and the role of Academia Organization Name: State Bank of Pakistan with IIU 2016-04-08 International Islamic University, Islamabad Seminar on Women Rights In Islam And Pakistani Legal System Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-03-30 Allama Iqbal Auditorium, (Faisal Masjid), IIUI Applications of Computational Mechanics for Real World Problem Solving Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2016-03-30 International Islamic University, Islamabad Workshop on Finance for Non-Financial Professionals Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2019-02-19 Understand the language associated with finance, stock market and investments. How to simplify the empirical work and what is the relevance of statistics to finance. Understand time value of money and its application in professional and personal decisions. Know how to download different financial data sets and perform basic / advance data analytical techniques. How to perform optimal decision using scenario analysis in business / finance. COMSATS University Islamabad Air Quality in Pakistan: Interpreting data and Improving Public Health Communication Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2019-04-22 COMSATS University Islamabad Training Workshop on PYTHON Data Analysis and Visualization Organization Name: International Islamic University, Islamabad 2019-07-05 The main objective of this hands-on workshop is to equip those who are looking forward to understand the step by step analysis in data applications in their respective fields. Participants will be able to explore the ways of data analysis and visualizations based techniques essential to address the real business world queries. International Islamic University, Islamabad COMSATS Summer Workshops Art, Design & Architecture Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2019-07-22 COMSATS University Islamabad International Conference on Radicalization: Perceptions, Realities and Challenges of Campus Life Organization Name: Air University, Islamabad 2018-09-26 Air University, Islamabad Eminent Speakers Dialogue Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2018-05-03 COMSATS University Islamabad Eminent Speaker Dialogue (Ideology of Pakistan in Today context) Organization Name: COMSATS UNIVERSITY ISLAMABAD 2018-04-05 COMSATS University Islamabad Changing Global Scenario and Kashmir Dispute Organization Name: Air University, Islamabad 2018-04-05 Air University, Islamabad Nation Building Organization Name: Air University, Islamabad 2018-05-03 Air University, Islamabad National Media Conference 2019 Organization Name: Air University, Islamabad 2019-10-10 Air University, Islamabad CERTIFICATE IN ESSENTIAL SKILLS IN HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION Organization Name: Riphah Academy of Research & Education 2019-03-01 Riphah International University, Islamabad Seminar on depression awareness by Buddy Support System Organization Name: Riphah International University, Islamabad 2019-03-29 We live in a difficult world, now. The pressures of hiding our internal struggles, fearing rejection for who we are is further bogging us down. We chose Buddy Support System because we think that it is very important to create awareness about these things so that people get to know that they are not alone and someone is putting an effort to make them feel good. Riphah International University, Islamabad The Nitty-Gritty of Public Speaking Organization Name: FAST National University, Islamabad 2018-10-22 Human Resource department of NUCES, Islamabad campus has organized two-days (in-house) training workshop (5th batch) titled The Nitty-Gritty of Public Speaking for Lab Engineers and Instructors on October 22-23, 2018. Mr. Muhammad Usman Gulzari, Lead Trainer at The Missing P, and former President of Islamabad Toastmasters Club, was the facilitator of the workshop. The fifth batch comprising of 21 colleagues of Islamabad and Peshawar campuses FAST National University, Islamabad Toolkit for Effective Professionals Organization Name: FAST National University, Islamabad 2018-10-07 Training focused on identified objectives/areas including effectively dealing with stress, time management, interpersonal communication, non-verbal language, coordination with cross functional teams, teamwork, leadership, conflict management and writing error-free emails. FAST National University, Islamabad Freelancing Seminar Organization Name: National Computing Education Accreditation Council 2018-09-28 A huge number of our final year students attended the seminar with full focus and concentration. In the end questions were answered by the speaker. The overall event was very successful and fruitful. FAST Peshawar Campus The Nitty-Gritty of Public Speaking Organization Name: HRD NUCES, Islamabad 2018-11-10 Training focused on identified objectives including overcoming nervousness/stage fright, organizing the speech, delivering a engaging talk with powerful opening and closing, expressing thoughts/ideas concisely and with clarity, speaking with poise and confidence, engaging participants during presentations, grabbing the attention of audience at the beginning and effectively closing presentations, using the voice tools and body language for maximum The Nitty-Gritty of Public Speaking Organization Name: NUCES, Islamabad 2018-08-01 Training focused on identified objectives including overcoming nervousness/stage fright, organizing the speech, delivering a engaging talk with powerful opening and closing, expressing thoughts/ideas concisely and with clarity, speaking with poise and confidence, engaging participants during presentations, grabbing the attention of audience at the beginning and effectively closing presentations, using the voice tools and body language for maximum FAST National University, Islamabad Industry Innovation Talk at USPCAS-E Organization Name: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCES & TECHNOLOGY (NUST) 2019-10-15 NUST Corporate Advisory Council (CAC) launched Research and Innovation Talk Series at NUST, the first of the talk series was conducted at US Pakistan Center for Advanced Studies in Energy (USPCAS-E) on October 15, 2019. Three renowned Energy Professionals graced the session as the keynote speakers: Mr Ahmad Hassnain, National Project Manager, UN Environment Programme (UNEP)/National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (NEECA), Dr Bruno J National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST) H-12, Islamabad, Pakistan From Campus to Corporate session organised by NUST Business School (NBS) at NBS Organization Name: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCES & TECHNOLOGY (NUST) 2019-10-03 From Campus to Corporate session was organised by NUST Business School (NBS), at NBS Seminar Hall, on October 3, 2019. Mr Ghazanfar Azzam, CEO Mobilink Microfinance Bank, was the keynote speaker of this talk session. The talk, attended by final year students of NBS, aimed at providing students with exposure to the current happenings and challenges of the corporate world, from the perspective of senior management belonging to multinational compa NUST Business School (NBS) Roundtable Conference at NUST CIPS on Dynamics of Forced Migration in Pakistan Organization Name: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCES & TECHNOLOGY (NUST) 2019-10-10 A roundtable titled, Dynamics of Forced Migration in Pakistan: Addressing Internal Displacement & Refugee Movements was convened by the NUST Centre for International Peace & Stability (CIPS) in collaboration with Hanns Seidel Foundation (HSF), Pakistan Chapter, at NUST Islamabad campus, on October 10, 2019. Mr Igor Ivancic, Assistant Representative (Protection) at the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) graced the occasion as National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST) H-12, Islamabad, Pakistan Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Technology News Bulletin - Latest S&T Innovations & Industrial Updates Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Technology Information Service : Technology News Bulletin <<TIS Home Technology Roundup online bulletin, a bimonthly publication, provides latest national & international innovative S&T news and forthcoming Industrial events. It also promotes products and services globally in sectors such as Agro-Industry, Energy, Medical Technology, Food Processing, Machinery, Pharmaceuticals, Textiles, Biotechnology, Building Materials, Chemicals, Electronics, Fisheries, and Nanotechnology, etc. 2025 January-February, 2025 (Vol.17, No.1) Read Online 2024 November-December, 2024 (Vol.16, No.6) Read Online September-October, 2024 (Vol.16, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2024 (Vol.16, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2024 (Vol.16, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2024 (Vol.16, No.2) Read Online January-Februrary, 2024 (Vol.16, No.1) Read Online 2023 Nov-Dec, 2023 (Vol.15, No.6) Read Online September-October, 2023 (Vol.15, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2023 (Vol.15, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2023 (Vol.15, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2023 (Vol.15, No.2) Read Online January-Februrary, 2023 (Vol.15, No.1) Read Online 2022 November-December, 2022 (Vol.14, No.6) Read Online September-October, 2022 (Vol.14, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2022 (Vol.14, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2022 (Vol.14, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2022 (Vol.14, No.2) Read Online January-February, 2022 (Vol.14, No.1) Read Online 2021 November-December, 2021 (Vol.13, No.6) Read Online September-October, 2021 (Vol.13, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2021 (Vol.13, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2021 (Vol.13, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2021 (Vol.13, No.2) Read Online January-February, 2021 (Vol.13, No.1) Read Online 2020 November-December, 2020 (Vol.12, No.6) Read Online September-October, 2020 (Vol.12, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2020 (Vol.12, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2020 (Vol.12, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2020 (Vol.12, No.2) Read Online January-February, 2020 (Vol.12, No.1) Read Online 2019 November-December, 2019 (Vol.11, No.6) Read Online September-October, 2019 (Vol.11, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2019 (Vol.11, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2019 (Vol.11, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2019 (Vol.11, No.2) Read Online January-February, 2019 (Vol.11, No.1) Read Online 2018 November-December, 2018 (Vol.10, No.6) Read Online September-October, 2018 (Vol.10, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2018 (Vol.10, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2018 (Vol.10, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2018 (Vol.10, No.2) Read Online January-Februrary, 2018 (Vol.10, No.1) Read Online 2017 November-December, 2017 (Vol.9, No.6) Read Online September-October, 2017 (Vol.9, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2017 (Vol.9, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2017 (Vol.9, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2017 (Vol.9, No.2) Read Online Jan-Feb, 2017 (Vol.9, No.1) Read Online 2016 Nov-Dec, 2016 (Vol.8, No.6) Read Online Sept-Oct, 2016 (Vol.8, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2016 (Vol.8, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2016 (Vol.8, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2016 (Vol.8, No.2) Read Online Jan-Feb, 2016 (Vol.8, No.1) Read Online 2015 Nov-Dec, 2015 (Vol.7, No.6) Read Online Sept-Oct, 2015 (Vol.7, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2015 (Vol.7, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2015 (Vol.7, No.3) Read Online March-April, 2015 (Vol.7, No.2) Read Online Jan-Feb, 2015 (Vol.7, No.1) Read Online 2014 Nov-Dec, 2014 (Vol.6, No.6) Read Online Sep-Oct, 2014 (Vol.6, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2014 (Vol.6, No.4) Read Online Mar-Jun, 2014 (Vol.6, No.2&3) Read Online Jan-Feb, 2014 (Vol.6, No.1) Read Online 2013 Sep-Oct, 2013 (Vol.5, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2013 (Vol.5, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2013 (Vol.5, No.3) Read Online Jan-Apr, 2013 (Vol.5, No.1&2) Read Online 2012 Nov-Dec, 2012 (Vol.4, No.6) Read Online Sep-Oct, 2012 (Vol.4, No.5) Read Online July-Aug, 2012 (Vol.4, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2012 (Vol.4, No.3) Read Online Jan-Feb, 2012 (Vol.4, No.1) Read Online 2011 Nov-Dec, 2011 (Vol.3, No.6) Read Online Sep-Oct, 2011 (Vol.3, No.5) Read Online July-August, 2011 (Vol.3, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2011 (Vol.3, No.3) Read Online March, 2011 (Vol.3, No.2) Read Online Jan-Feb, 2011 (Vol.3, No.1) Read Online 2010 Nov-Dec, 2010 (Vol.2, No.6) Read Online Sep-Oct, 2010 (Vol.2, No.5) Read Online July-Aug, 2010 (Vol.2, No.4) Read Online May-June, 2010 (Vol.2, No.3) Read Online Mar-Apr, 2010 (Vol.2, No.2) Read Online Jan-Feb, 2010 (Vol.2, No.1) Read Online 2009 Nov-Dec, 2009 (Vol.1, No.3) Read Online Sep-Oct, 2009(Vol.1, No.2) Read Online July-Aug, 2009 (Vol.1, No.1) Read Online In order to get copy of these publication or get subscription to get these publication regularly, Please contact us . Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Tenders Announcement Open Tenders Closed Tenders Subject Closing Date MS Word Format PDF Format INVITATION TO BID Uploaded on 25/03/2025 CORRIGENDUM FOR NOTICE FOR INVITATION TO BIDS Uploaded on 20/11/2024 NOTICE FOR INVITATION TO BIDS Uploaded on 20/11/2024 PROCUREMENT OF ART CARD & FLYING PAPER Uploaded on 19/8/2024 Supply of Printing Material Uploaded on 25/05/2023 PRE-QUALIFICATION NOTICE Uploaded on 13/04/2023 Request for Proposal (RFP) for Cloud Storage, Maintenance, and Support for CMP based Application Uploaded on 01/03/2023 Supply of Printing Material Uploaded on 15/11/2022 Technical Evaluation of the Tender for supply of Printing Press Machine Uploaded on 17/10/2022 Supply, Installation, Testing and Commissioning of Printing Uploaded on 09/09/2022 Software Development, Integration and Cloud Services On Turnkey Basis 29/08/2022 till 10:30 a.m. Final Evaluation Report (PURCHASING OF IT EQUIPMENT UNDER DEVELOPMENT PROJECT) Uploaded on 16/5/2022 PURCHASING OF IT EQUIPMENT UNDER DEVELOPMENT PROJECT(NDA) 29/04/2022 till 11:00 a.m. Supply of Printing Material 14/02/2022 till 11:00 a.m. Supply of Branded Servers (QTY:2) 29/10/2021 till 11:00 a.m. Request for Proposal (RFP) for Maintenance Services along with cloud 11/06/2021 till 11:00 a.m. Purchasing of IT Equipment 11/03/2021 till 11:00 a.m. Evalution Report 16/04/2021 Supply of printing material. 08/12/2020 till 11:00 a.m. OPEN AUCTION OF ITEMS. 18/08/2020 till 11:30 a.m. Civil work & renovation for repair and maintenance of building. 05/08/2020 till 11:00 a.m. Request for Proposal (RFP) for Maintenance Services 21/05/2020 till 11:00 a.m. Supply of Furniture & IT equipment (RFID) 21/05/2020 till 11:00 a.m. Supply of printing material For PASTIC 26/12/2019 till 11:00 a.m. Civil work & renovation of PASTIC building 03/12/2019 till 11:00 a.m. Purchasing of IT Equipment 22/11/2019 till 11:00 a.m. Purchasing of IT Equipment 18/03/2019 till 11:00 a.m. Tender Notice for PASTIC Library RFID Security System. 05/09/2019 till 11:00 a.m. PASTIC, Library RFID Security System. ------- Tender Notice for Web Portal and Mobile App Development 16/4/2019 till 11:00 a.m. Purchase of Electrical Items 15/1/2019 till 11:00 a.m. Civil work , renovation , repair and maintenance 3/1/2019 till 11:00 a.m. Purchasing of IT Equipment under SDF Project 28-12-2018 till 11:00 a.m. WIRELESS LAN SOLUTION WITH INSTALLATION 12-24-2018 till 11:00 a.m. INVITATION TO BID 12-17-2018 till 11:00 a.m. Civil work & renovation for repair and maintenance of building 11-12-2018 till 11:00 a.m. Order Suppliers deals in Printing Material, Paper Products 27-11-2018 till 11:00 a.m. Tender for Supply of UPS 25-06-2018 till 11:00 a.m. Tender Notice Purchase of Furniture 20-06-2018 till 11:00 a.m. Integration and Cloud Storage RFP for Software Development, Integration and Cloud Storage 04-06-2018 till 10:30 a.m. Purchasing of Electric Items 09-05-2018 till 11:00 a.m. Purchasing of IT Equipment 30-04-2018 till 11:00 a.m. Supply of printing material and services 20-12-2017 till 11:00 a.m. INVITATION TO BID Library Furniture Items 28-11-2017 till 11:00 a.m. Tender Notice for Supply of IT Equipment 21-09-2017 till 11:00 a.m. Hiring of Marketing Services and to organize the event/ program 08-09-2017 till 11:00 a.m. Expression of interest for hiring the services of consultant 10-07-2017 till 11:00 a.m. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Technology Information Service (TIS) - R&D & Industrial Development Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Technology Information Service (TIS) To promote R&D-based industrial development in the country, PASTIC TIS-Service undertakes the following activities: Develops collaborations with Chambers of Commerce and Industry (CCIs) across Pakistan to promote local industry, small manufacturing enterprises (SMEs), their products/services, and challenges/issues by developing different indigenous industrial databases available on the PASTIC Website (TIS-Databases). Promotes S&T/R&D organizations/academia and their commercializable technologies/research expertise and R&D projects in different industrial sectors by developing different indigenous S&T/R&D databases available on the PASTIC Website (TIS Databases). Promotes University-Industry partnership (UIP) through seminars/workshops across Pakistan for "Building Effective Coordination between R&D & Industry for Enhancing Innovations, Competitiveness, and Productivity of Indigenous Technologies." Enhances the capacity building of scientists on communication skills and creates platforms between scientists and members of the media for the promotion of scientific and technological innovation in society. Organizes Technology & IT-Expos across Pakistan for empowering youth and the general public on new and faster ways of delivering and accessing information to improve their productivity in ICTs, education, health, and other social services, banking, and government services, and create earning opportunities. Provides Technology and Innovation Support Services under Technology and Innovation Support Centre (TISC) Desks (in collaboration with HEC-IPO Pakistan & WIPO) at PASTIC National Centre Islamabad as well as at its 06 sub-centres, including Karachi, Quetta, Lahore, Faisalabad, Peshawar, and Muzaffarabad, for guidance and support of the innovators on how to exploit their potential to create, protect, and manage their intellectual property (IP) rights by providing the following quality technology information services: Access to online patent and non-patent (scientific and technical) resources and IP-related publications. Assistance in searching and retrieving technology information. Training in patent database search. On-demand searches (novelty, state-of-the-art, and infringement). Create awareness of the TISC program through training, seminars, library visitors, and online queries. Promotion of the TISC project (importance and use of patent information). IPRs (aspects of product/technology commercialization, licensing). Development of IP Strategies (information on filing patents, trademarks, copyrights, & industrial designs, etc.). TIS Services can be explored by clicking the links below: TIS Databases TIS Publication TISC Seminars & Workshops PASTIC-TIS Collaborators TIS Events Company/Industry Promotion Picture Gallery Important Links Feedback Contact Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Workshops & Trainings - Advancing Research & Scientific Skills Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Workshops & Trainings The PASTIC National Center is dedicated to advancing research and knowledge through its comprehensive training programs. It operates a network of sub-centers that regularly organize specialized training sessions on various scientific and research topics. These sessions are designed to enhance the skills and knowledge of the research community, keeping them updated with the latest advancements. By fostering a collaborative environment, PASTIC contributes to the growth and development of scientific inquiry and innovation across the country. Their ongoing commitment to education ensures that researchers have access to the tools and training they need to excel. Trainings Calendar for year 2024 Trainings Calendar for year 2023 Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC | Ongoing & Completed Projects - Advancing Scientific Research & Digital Archives Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Projects ON-GOING PROJECTS COMPLETED PROJECTS ON-GOING PROJECTS National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) . Sponsoring Ministry: Ministry Of Science and Technology Duration: 2 years Project Budget: Rs. 57.00 M ABOUT PASTIC Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Centre (PASTIC) a functioning unit of Pakistan Science Foundation under umbrella of Ministry of Science & Technology is a national hub for collection and dissemination of S&T information to Scientists, Engineers, Technologists and industrialist across the country to cater to the vital information needs through its anticipatory and responsive information services for socioeconomic development of the country. PASTIC National Centre is located in Quaid-i-Azam University Campus Islamabad whereas its Sub-Centres are located in Karachi, Lahore, Peshawar, Quetta, Faisalabad and Muzaffarabad. PASTIC services include National Science Reference Library (NSRL), Abstracting and Indexing Service, Literature Search, Document Supply Service, Technology Information Service and Reprographic Service. ABSTRACTING AND INDEXING SERVICEOF PASTIC: Abstracting and Indexing is a specialised process undertaken by information specialists to create summaries of documents and assign best representation words (keywords) to make it available for identification and quick search. PASTIC Abstracting and Indexing Service (AIS) was initiated in 1960 by bringing out secondary Journal entitled "Pakistan Science Abstracts" (PSA). Main objective of PASTIC AIS service is not only to keep record of the research publishedin local scientific journalsbut also assistscholarly community at their doorstep to uplift quality of research (improving accessibility, citation and reputation) by adopting modern ICT tools and techniques. NEW CHALLENGES: Looking onto the dire need of the journal publishers as well as scientific community to have a single journal publishing (online) and accessing forum and to fill the research gap in line with the national needs, PASTIC has taken initiative to launch a National S&T journals publishers forum under consortium activity through implementation ofthe recently approved development project entitledDevelopment of National Digital Archive of Research published in Pakistani Journals.Project is aimed to preserve and disseminate indigenous research published in S&T Journals through development of National Digital archive of research published at country level. Project Objective: Launching of National Consortium of S&T Journal Publishers of Pakistan To extend free ICT infrastructure(Software/Hardware) to journal publishersCommunity for journal hosting, maintenance and with complete technical assistance/backup services Technical/Financial support for Scanning and Data Entry of Journals Data in consortium repository (full Text) [Last 20 Years] Capacity building of journal publishers and scientific community on digital content development/Usage Federated search of the digital repository through single online forum along with visualization model to review reports/trends RATIONALE OF THE CONSORTIUM: Sustainable digital repository of indigenous research published in Scientific journals of Pakistan National Platformof Scientific Journals Publishers of Pakistan National standard for journals repository (Digitization) Journal Management System (OJS) along with Cloud hosting services (free) Journal data import and backup services (Free) Financial assistance for digitization of journals former data (as per approved PC-1 policy) Access to indigenous scholarly material through single online forum Capacity building of journal Editors and publishers COMPLETED PROJECTS Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan . Sponsoring Ministry: Ministry Of Science and Technology Website: https://consortium.pastic.gov.pk/ Duration: 2 years Project Budget: Rs. 57.59 M Project Objective: Development of Consortium of S&T/R&D Libraries of Pakistan to facilitate the scientific community by sharing of scientific information resources among S&T Libraries of Pakistan and capacity building (Training) of library professionals to cope with the modern challenges of digital era and s initial step towards development of knowledge-based economy. Main Component: Sharing of Scientific Resources of Libraries of: Universities National Centers of Excellence Scientific Organizations Development of Tools Union Online Public Access Catalogue (Union OPAC) for Libraries holdings Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature Union List of International Scientific Research Databases subscribed by S&T and R&D Organizations of Pakistan Benefits /Outcomes of the Project: Easy Access to S & T and R&D Information Centralized approach for Library Automation through Cloud Space Scattered Indigenous S & T and R&D Data will be Centralized (Reports, Conference & Seminar Proceedings, Training Workshops and Talk Shows Videos) Strengthening of Scientific Research Community through Consortium Savings of costs. Transform Typical Librarians into Innovative Library Leaders (Like USA Programme SILL) Library Automation Library Digitization Project Outcome/impact: Networking would encourage and promote co-operation and partnerships between the business women and facilitate entrepreneurial activities among SAARC women Enhance gender equality & employment opportunities for women. Boost women social as well as economic status. Improve trade/ exports opportunities in the region. Encourage young women (starts ups) young women through sharing success stories of established business women. Encouragement, support and guidance of startups through promotion of success stories leading business women. Reduce poverty and hunger in the region Networking and Capacity Building of Women Entrepreneurs (SMEs) from SAARC Countries. Sponsoring Organization: SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Website: http://saarcweportal.com/ Collaborating Countries: Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Nepal, India, Maldives and Sri Lanka. Duration: 18 Months Project Budget: The total approved budget for eight (08) SAARC Member States: 0.7600 Million US$ with Pakistan share of 0.2000 Million US$ (F/A-i) and each other of SAARC Member State's share is 0.0800 Million US$ Project Objective: Development of a Web Portal and networking of women SMEs in SAARC region to: Promote-Women entrepreneurial networks for advancement of their businesses Co-operation and partnerships for promotion of their products and services Facilitate women entrepreneurial activities for betterment of their economies. Project Activities: Development of SAARC Women SMEs Web Portal A web portal will be developed by PASTIC Development of database of more than 1600 SAARC Women SMEs (from all the 8 countries). The country collaborators from 8 countries will establish a project desk in their offices and collect business information of 200 women SMEs from ICT Capacity Building Workshop for 850 SAARC Women SMEs (two workshops in each country). Two Portal Awareness and Capacity Building Workshops will be organized in each SAARC member country. Each country collaborator is responsible to identify the workshops participants and logistic arrangements where as two resource persons for each workshops will be provided by PASTIC. Project Output: A SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Web Portal uploaded with: Provide Businesses information women entrepreneurs through a database of more than 1850 from all the SAARC member states. Networking SAARC Women Entrepreneurs. Display of innovative technologies/products (food & beverages sector or packaging or etc sectors) to start new business. A quarterly e News Bulletin to promote Women SMEs products, services as well as information on their business activities (seminars/exhibitions). 850 skilled women to boost their businesses through use of e-business management (e-commerce & e-marketing) skills. Project Outcome/impact: Networking would encourage and promote co-operation and partnerships between the business women and facilitate entrepreneurial activities among SAARC women Enhance gender equality & employment opportunities for women. Boost women social as well as economic status. Improve trade/ exports opportunities in the region. Encourage young women (starts ups) young women through sharing success stories of established business women. Encouragement, support and guidance of startups through promotion of success stories leading business women. Reduce poverty and hunger in the region Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Sponsoring Ministry Ministry Of Science and Technology Duration 1 Year Cost(In million) 37.41 Main Objective Enhancing the printing quality of PASTIC Press. Strengthening the printing services. Introduction of latest computer graphic software technology to ensure high speed and quality Reprographic services with timely execution and quality assurance. Facilitating the printing work of publication, reports etc. of S&T and R&D organizations. Main Components of the Programme Acquisition of Machinery and Equipment Acquisition of Air-conditioning system Renovation of Reprographic Section Operational Vehicle Staff training Science Awareness through TV Channels. Sponsoring Ministry Ministry of Science & Technology, MoST Duration 02-09-2004 to 30-12-2007 Cost(In million) 16.00 Main Objective Creation of awareness and interest in science and technology through multimedia, specially the TV leading to socio-economic development and better quality of life in Pakistan. Main Components of the Programme Acquisition, translation and dubbing of S&T films and documentaries on important aspects of science and technology. Production of S&T films and documentaries on important S&T issues and their possible solutions for the economic development of the country. Panel discussions on TV, involving scientists and eminent scholars, for clarification of scientific concepts and technological issues. Training of scientists and media practitioners for popularization of science through mass media. Out put/Achievements Programme 1 :Acquired, translated and dubbed: 62 documentaries Aired: 21 documentaries Programme 2 :Documentaries produced:9 Aired:9 Programme 3 :Recorded and aired Panel Discussions:10 Programme 4 :Workshops organized:5 Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC. Sponsoring Ministry Ministry Of Science and Technology Duration 2001-2005 Cost(In million) 39.70 Main Objective To strengthen the S&T information service through resource sharing. Main Components of the Programme Establishment of National Science & Technology Database/ Information Network. Screening of Major Libraries of Pakistan and Preparation of Union Catalogue on CD-ROM. Training Programme for Library Automation. Out put/Achievements Networking was established with HEC PERN network and with network members. CD-ROM Databases were acquired according to requirement of PASTIC and network members. Services have been enhanced and time for service has been reduced from 4 weeks to a few hours Computers servers, Client PC's, licensed software and telecommunication infrastructure have been implemented / installed. Data of about 11626 Journals have been collected from 200 S & T Libraries. Compiled and published Union Catalogue of 200 librarieswhich was also prepared on CD-ROM and uploaded with advance searching facility on PASTIC website (URL www.pastic.gov.pk) Training lab was set up at PASTIC National Center and Sub-Center, Karachi Automation of PASTIC Library was initiated and 11625 records were entered in the database. Twenty one training courses/ workshops were organized on different topics, viz., Information handling for promotion of E-Business, use of Patent Information System, library automation, and knowledge management etc. in major cities of Pakistan. 1134 people from different libraries attended the courses. Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Sponsoring Ministry Ministry Of Science and Technology Duration 1990-1991 Cost(In million) 4.00 Main Objective Purchase of primary and secondary journals, reference books etc. Out put/Achievements PASTIC library acquire about 300 books and subscribed to 23 S&T Journals (128 issues) and following databases on CD-ROM. Applied Science and Technology index. Science Citation Index for 1993 only. Poltox from 1996 to date. MEDLINE from 1966 to 1933. Life Science Collection. PROQUEST. SOCIOFILE. Current Contents: Chemistry, Physics and Earth Sciences. Current Content Service. Sponsoring Ministry Ministry Of Science and Technology Duration 1990-1991 Cost(In million) 0.2 Main Objective To provide Current Awareness to scientists/researchers by sending them contents of S&T Journals. To overcome the shortage of budget of procurement of important S&T journals. Out put/Achievements The current content service was provided each month to 461 individual scientists in the field of Biology, Chemistry, Microbiology, Computer Science, Biochemistry, Earth Science, Mathematiocs, Physics and Technology. About 200 articles on an average were supplied per year. The project ended on 30-06-1991 but the service continued. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Sponsoring Ministry Ministry Of Science and Technology Duration 1990-1991 Cost(In million) 2.09 Main Objective To strengthen activities of PASTIC Out put/Achievements PASTIC acquire the following equipment under the project IBM RISC/6000 Model320 mini Computer with AIX Operating System and COBOL Compiler. IBM Laser printer Model 4019. IBM Compatible 80486 Systems (Qty 2). IBM Compatible 80386 Systems (Qty 9). IBM Compatible 80286 Systems (Qty 2). HP Scan IIC Scanner. HP Paint Jet XL Printer. 3KVA Stabilizer. 1KVA stabilizer. Novell Netware for 10 users. Modems (Qty 4). CD-ROM disk drivers (Qty 3). 5.25" rewritable optical disk drive. 130 MB Hard Disk (Qty 3). PC Mouse (Qty 3). 386DX-40 Mother Board. Panasonic Dot Matrix Printer (Qty 3). UPS with Battery. Estiblishment of LAN at PASTIC Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
PASTIC :: The Information Provider Skip to main content Main navigation Home Profile About PASTIC Vision & Mission History Organizational Chart Objectives Achievements Facilities News Newsletters Jobs Tenders Workshops & Trainings Projects (Ongoing) National Digital Archive of Research Published in Pakistani Journals (NDA) Projects (Completed) Modernization of PASTIC National Science Reference Library for effective resource sharing among S&T libraries in Pakistan SAARC Development Fund Bhutan Strengthening and Enhancement of Reprographic services of PASTIC. Science Awareness through TV Channels. Establishment of National Science and Technology Database/Information Network at PASTIC Strengthening of PASTIC National Science Reference Library. Current Content Service. Setting up database facilities at PASTIC. Publications Pakistan Journal of Computer and Information Systems Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Union catalogue (Books & Journals) Directory of Scientific Periodicals Book of Abstracts & Conferences Technology News Bulletin Fresh Arrivals Services Services Abstracting and Indexing Bibliographic/Document Supply Services Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries National Science Reference Library Technology Information Services Reprographic Service International Liaison Services Feedback Applications/Web Portals Pakistan Science Abstract (Research Published in Pakistan) Consortium of S&T and R&D Libraries of Pakistan PakCat (Union Catalogue of Pakistani Libraries) Digital Repository of Indigenous Literature [Dspace] COVID-19 S&T Information Resource Portal UNESCO, IFAP Committee Pakistan SAARC Women Entrepreneurs Portal S&T Knowledge Databases Technology Information Services(TIS) Scientific Books by Pakistani Authors Scientific Periodicals of Pakistan R & D Projects R & D Equipment National Scientists Directory S & T Libraries S & T Societies/Associations S&T/R&D Organizations of Pakistan Energy Articles Climate Change Articles Database of Conferences, Workshops, Seminars & Proceedings Request forms Science and Technology (S&T) Data Forms Scholarly Literature and Patent Document Request Form MoST RESOURCES Workshop on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Centre (PASTIC), Islamabad and Institute of Research Promotion (IRP), Lahore have planned to organize a series of workshops on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" at universities across Pakistan to orient researchers about approaches and practices used in industry driven technologies as well as to train them how technologies are being planned, developed and commercialized. Overview The workshop is designed to orient researchers of the universities and R&D organizations about approaches and practices used in industry driven technologies. Participants will learn how number of technologies were planned, developed and commercialized. The will also learn about processes, fabrication and pilot tests trials of market driven products. The workshop includes significant learning for research managers in terms of technology development process, transfer framework and enabling factors for successful commercialization. Researchers will finally have number of projects with viable potentials as take away for their universities to develop and commercialize. The workshop is based on case studies of products gone through identification, planning, lab works, pilot testing and production scale. Objectives To orient researchers on how projects are identified in industry To make researchers understand about issues of process of technology To train researchers on lab trails requirements of industry driven project To share with researchers about pilot scale issues and challenges To train research officers about commercialization process To share publication opportunities from applied research Participants Researchers, R&D managers, ORIC heads, Managers of research agencies Learning Areas How industry driven projects are identified and what determines potential of industry investment? How industry driven projects are planned to satisfy investors? What is intended at lab scale and how lab trails produce industry required technology? Technology challenges of production level The 1st One-day Training Workshop on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" organized by PASTIC, IRP and ORIC-UMT at the University of Management Technology, Lahore on September 22, 2014. The 2nd One-day Training Workshop on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" organized by PASTIC, IRP and ORIC-UAF at Agriculture University, Faisalabad on September 27, 2014. The 3rd One-day Training Workshop on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" organized by PASTIC, IRP and ORIC-BZU at Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan on October 23, 2014. The 4th One-day Training Workshop on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" organized by PASTIC, IRP and ORIC-CIIT at COMSATS, Abbotabad on December 11, 2014. The 5th One-day Training Workshop on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" organized by PASTIC, IRP and ORIC-NED, at NED University , Karachi on January 5, 2015. The 6th One-day Training Workshop on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" organized by PASTIC, IRP and ORIC-KU, at Karachi University , Karachi on January 6, 2015. The 7th One-day Training Workshop on "Developing Industry Driven Technologies" organized by PASTIC, IRP and ORIC-Bahria, at Bahria University , Karachi on January 7, 2015. Visitors Since April 2017: Mission To serve as an Information Provider for Research & Development enhancing access to and delivery of information by catering to the information needs of Researchers, Entrepreneurs, Industry, Educationists, Policy Makers and Planners through anticipatory and responsive Information Services. Popular Resources Pakistan Science Abstracts Union Catalogue UNESCO, IFAP Pakistan R&D Projects Scientists Directory SAARC SMEs Portal Contact us Director General Office Director Office IT Support Section Technological Information Services PASTIC National Science Reference Library Reprographic Services Section Copyright 2021 PASTIC National Center, Islamabad
